BOOK 1
THE ARGUMENT

5

10

15

20

This first Book proposes, first in brief, the whole Subject, Mans disobedience, and the loss
thereupon of Paradise wherein he was plac’t: Then touches the prime cause of his fall,
the Serpent, or rather Satan in the Serpent; who revolting from God, and drawing
to his side many Legions of Angels, was by the command of God driven out of Heaven
with all his Crew into the great Deep. Which action past over, the Poem hasts into the
midst of things, presenting Satan with his Angels now fallen into Hell, describ’d here,
not in the Center ( for Heaven and Earth may be suppos’d as yet not made, certainly not
yet accurst) but in a place of utter darkness, fitliest call’d Chaos: Here Satan with his
Angels lying on the burning Lake, thunder-struck and astonisht, after a certain space
recovers, as from confusion, calls up him who next in Order and Dignity lay by him;
they confer of thir miserable fall. Satan awakens all his Legions, who lay till then in
the same manner confounded; They rise, thir Numbers, array of Battel, thir chief
Leaders nam’d, according to the Idols known afterwards in Canaan and the
Countries adjoyning. To these Satan directs his Speech, comforts them with hope
yet of regaining Heaven, but tells them lastly of a new World and new kind of Creature
to be created, according to an ancient Prophesie or report in Heaven; for that Angels
were long before this visible Creation, was the opinion of many ancient Fathers. To find
out the truth of this Prophesie, and what to determin thereon he refers to a full
Councel. What his Associates thence attempt. Pandemonium the Palace of Satan rises,
suddenly built out of the Deep: The infernal Peers there sit in Councel.

Of Mans First Disobedience, and the Fruit
Of that Forbidden Tree, whose mortal tast
Brought Death into the World, and all our woe,
With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
5 Restore us, and regain the blissful Seat,
Sing Heav’nly Muse, that on the secret top
Of Oreb, or of Sinai, didst inspire

5–6. According to Horace, the epic poet should begin in medias res.
7. Center. Hell was not, as some thought, in the center of the earth.
17. Fathers. Church Fathers writing in the early Christian centuries, e.g., Jerome, Origen, Basil, Chrysostom,
Gregory of Nazianzen. See Milton’s Christian Doctrine, 1.7.
1–26. The first Proem contains the epic statement of theme (1–5) and the invocation.
4. Christ, the second Adam.
6. See 7.1 and note. Urania, the Greek Muse of astronomy, had been made into the Muse of Christian
poetry by Du Bartas and other religious poets. Here she is identified as the Muse that inspired biblical
prophet-poets.

12

10

15

20

25

30
 
That Shepherd, who first taught the chosen Seed,
In the Beginning how the Heav’ns and Earth
Rose out of Chaos: Or if Sion Hill
Delight thee more, and Siloa’s Brook that flow’d
Fast by the Oracle of God; I thence
Invoke thy aid to my adventrous Song,
That with no middle flight intends to soar
Above th’ Aonian Mount, while it pursues
Things unattempted yet in Prose or Rhime.
And chiefly Thou O Spirit, that dost prefer
Before all Temples th’ upright heart and pure,
Instruct me, for Thou know’st; Thou from the first
Wast present, and with mighty wings outspread
Dove-like satst brooding on the vast Abyss
And mad’st it pregnant: What in me is dark
Illumin, what is low raise and support;
That to the highth of this great Argument°
I may assert Eternal Providence,
And justifie° the wayes of God to men.
Say first, for Heav’n hides nothing from thy view
Nor the deep Tract of Hell, say first what cause
Mov’d our Grand Parents in that happy State,
Favour’d of Heav’n so highly, to fall off
From thir Creator, and transgress his Will
For° one restraint, Lords of the World besides?

subject
show the justice of

because of

8. Moses, thought to be the author of Genesis and the other four books of the Pentateuch, was tending sheep
on Mount Horeb (“Oreb”) when God spoke to him from a burning bush (Exod. 3:1– 2); he received the
Law on the highest peak, “Sinai.”
chosen Seed. The Jews.
9–10 In the Beginning. Echoes Gen. 1:1; Milton thought God created the universe out of unformed matter
(“Chaos”), not out of nothing.
Sion Hill. Mount Zion, associated with the biblical poet David (reputed
author of many psalms); also the site of Solomon’s Temple with its songs and ceremonies.
11–12 Siloa’s Brook. Siloah, a pool near Mount Zion (Neh. 3:15); it parallels Aganippe, the Muses’ spring.
Also Siloam, the pool where Jesus cured a blind man (John 9:1–11).
Oracle. Mount Zion as site of
Divine teaching and prophecy (Isa. 2:3).
15 Aonian Mount. Mount Helicon, home of the classical Muses.
16. The line translates Ariosto, Orlando Furioso 1.2.2: “Cosa non detta in prosa mai, né in rima.”
17 Spirit. Probably the creative power of God (see Milton’s commentary on Gen. 1:2 in Christian Doctrine,
1.7), but possibly the Holy Spirit, understood in antitrinitarian terms (ch. 6).
17–22. A composite of biblical phrases (e.g., Gen. 1:2, 1 Cor. 3:16, Mark 1:10, Luke 3:22, and John 1:32).
Milton’s brooding image comes from the Hebrew, accurately translated in the Tremellius Latin Bible
(“incubabat”).
27. An opening question like this is an epic convention. Compare Aeneid 1.8, “Musa, mihi causas memora”
(“Tell me the cause, O Muse”).

Book 1

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

Who first seduc’d them to that foul revolt?
Th’ infernal Serpent; he it was, whose guile
Stird up with Envy and Revenge, deceiv’d
The Mother of Mankind, what time° his Pride
Had cast him out from Heav’n, with all his Host°
Of Rebel Angels, by whose aid aspiring
To set himself in Glory above his Peers,°
He trusted to have equal’d the most High,
If he oppos’d; and with ambitious aim
Against the Throne and Monarchy of God
Rais’d impious War in Heav’n and Battel proud
With vain attempt. Him the Almighty Power
Hurld headlong flaming from th’ Ethereal Skie
With hideous ruine and combustion down
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell
In Adamantine Chains and penal Fire,
Who durst defie th’ Omnipotent to Arms.
Nine times the Space that measures Day and Night
To mortal men, he with his horrid crew
Lay vanquisht, rowling in the fiery Gulfe
Confounded though immortal: But his doom
Reserv’d him to more wrath; for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain
Torments him; round he throws his baleful° eyes
That witness’d huge affliction and dismay
Mixt with obdurate pride and stedfast hate:
At once as far as Angels kenn° he views
The dismal Situation waste and wilde,
A Dungeon horrible, on all sides round
As one great Furnace flam’d, yet from those flames
No light, but rather darkness visible
Serv’d onely to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes

13

when
army
equals, nobles

malignant

range of sight

33. Compare Iliad 1.8, asking who first sowed discord among the Greeks.
34. See Rev. 12:9: “that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan.” The description of Satan’s fall (42 – 9) echoes
Isa. 14:12–15, Luke 10:18, and Jude 6.
48. Adamant was a mythical substance of great hardness.
50. Alludes to the analogous fall of the defeated Titans in Greek myth (Hesiod, Theogony 664 –735), who fell
nine days from heaven to earth and nine more into Tartarus.
66. The phrase alludes to the inscription over Dante’s Hell, “All hope abandon, you who enter here” (Inferno
3.9) and to Euripides, Troades 681, “to me even hope, that remains to all mortals, never comes.”

14

70

75

80

85

90

95

100
 
That comes to all; but torture without end
Still urges,° and a fiery Deluge, fed
With ever-burning Sulphur unconsum’d:
Such place Eternal Justice had prepar’d
For those rebellious, here thir Prison ordain’d
In utter darkness, and thir portion set
As far remov’d from God and light of Heav’n
As from the Center thrice to th’ utmost Pole.
O how unlike the place from whence they fell!
There the companions of his fall, o’rewhelm’d
With Floods and Whirlwinds of tempestuous fire,
He soon discerns, and weltring° by his side
One next himself in power, and next in crime,
Long after known in Palestine, and nam’d
Beelzebub. To whom th’ Arch-Enemy,
And thence in Heav’n call’d Satan, with bold words
Breaking the horrid silence thus began.
If thou beest he; But O how fall’n! how chang’d
From him, who in the happy Realms of Light
Cloth’d with transcendent brightness didst out-shine
Myriads though bright: If he whom mutual league,
United thoughts and counsels, equal hope
And hazard in the Glorious Enterprize,
Joynd with me once, now misery hath joynd
In equal ruin: into what Pit thou seest
From what highth fall’n, so much the stronger prov’d
He with his Thunder: and till then who knew
The force of those dire Arms? yet not for those,
Nor what the Potent Victor in his rage
Can else inflict, do I repent or change,
Though chang’d in outward lustre, that fixt mind
And high disdain, from sence of injur’d merit,
That with the mightiest rais’d me to contend,
And to the fierce contention brought along

always provokes

rolling in the waves

74. Milton here describes the distance from Heaven to Hell as three times the distance from the center (earth)
to the outermost sphere. Cf. other descriptions of the universe at 2.1051–3 and 8.66 –170.
81. The Phoenician sun god Baal (the name in Hebrew means “Lord of the Flies”); in Matt. 12:24 he is called
“the prince of the devils.” Like Satan (whose name in Hebrew means “Adversary”) and the other fallen
angels, he is now known by the name he will bear in Hell and as a pagan deity.
84–5. Satan’s opening words recall Aeneas’ vision of the ghost of Hector on the night of Troy’s fall, “so changed
from the living Hector” (Aeneid 2.274–5).

Book 1

105

110

115

120

125

130

135

Innumerable force of Spirits arm’d
That durst dislike his reign, and me preferring,
His utmost power with adverse power oppos’d
In dubious° Battel on the Plains of Heav’n,
And shook his throne. What though the field be lost?
All is not lost; the unconquerable Will,
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield:
And what is else not to be overcome?
That Glory never shall his wrath or might
Extort from me. To bow and sue for grace
With suppliant knee, and deifie his power,
Who from the terrour of this Arm so late
Doubted° his Empire, that were low indeed,
That were an ignominy and shame beneath
This downfall; since by Fate the strength of Gods
And this Empyreal substance cannot fail,°
Since through experience of this great event
In Arms not worse, in foresight much advanc’t,
We may with more successful hope resolve
To wage by force or guile eternal Warr
Irreconcileable, to our grand Foe,
Who now triumphs, and in th’ excess of joy
Sole reigning holds the Tyranny of Heav’n.
So spake th’ Apostate Angel, though in pain,
Vaunting aloud, but rackt with deep despare:
And him thus answer’d soon his bold Compeer.°
O Prince, O Chief of many Throned Powers
That led th’ imbattelld Seraphim to Warr
Under thy conduct, and in dreadful deeds
Fearless, endanger’d Heav’ns perpetual King;
And put to proof his high Supremacy,
Whether upheld by strength, or Chance, or Fate,
Too well I see and rue the dire event,°
That with sad overthrow and foul defeat
Hath lost us Heav’n, and all this mighty Host

15

of uncertain outcome

feared for

cease to exist

comrade

outcome

105. Cf. 6.833–4.
116–17 Gods. Usually angels (cf. 3.341), whose substance is “empyreal” (fiery, the substance of the highest
heaven). But Satan sometimes uses “Gods” to imply a pagan pantheon (cf. 5.70 – 81, 9.718–30).
128–9. According to tradition there were nine orders of angels arranged hierarchically: Seraphim, Cherubim,
Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Powers, Principalities, Archangels, and Angels. The poem uses some of
these titles, but does not keep the hierarchy.

16

140

145

150

155

160

165

170

175
 
In horrible destruction laid thus low,
As far as Gods and Heav’nly Essences
Can perish: for the mind and spirit remains
Invincible, and vigour soon returns,
Though all our Glory extinct, and happy state
Here swallow’d up in endless misery.
But what if he our Conquerour, (whom I now
Of force° believe Almighty, since no less
Then such could hav orepow’rd such force as ours)
Have left us this our spirit and strength intire
Strongly to suffer and support our pains,
That we may so suffice° his vengeful ire,
Or do him mightier service as his thralls°
By right of Warr, what e’re his business be
Here in the heart of Hell to work in Fire,
Or do his Errands in the gloomy Deep;
What can it then avail though yet we feel
Strength undiminisht, or eternal being
To undergo eternal punishment?
Whereto with speedy words th’ Arch-fiend reply’d.
Fall’n Cherube, to be weak is miserable
Doing or Suffering: but of this be sure,
To do ought good never will be our task,
But ever to do ill our sole delight,
As being the contrary to his high will
Whom we resist. If then his Providence
Out of our evil seek to bring forth good,
Our labour must be to pervert that end,
And out of good still to find means of evil;
Which oft times may succeed, so as perhaps
Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb
His inmost counsels from thir destind aim.
But see the angry Victor hath recall’d
His Ministers of vengeance and pursuit
Back to the Gates of Heav’n: The Sulphurous Hail
Shot after us in storm, oreblown° hath laid
The fiery Surge, that from the Precipice
Of Heav’n receiv’d us falling, and the Thunder,
Wing’d with red Lightning and impetuous rage,
Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now
To bellow through the vast and boundless Deep.
Let us not slip° th’ occasion, whether scorn,

necessarily

satisfy
slaves

calmed

miss

Book 1

180

185

190

195

200

205

210

Or satiate° fury yield it from our Foe.
Seest thou yon dreary Plain, forlorn and wilde,
The seat of desolation, voyd of light,
Save what the glimmering of these livid° flames
Casts pale and dreadful? Thither let us tend
From off the tossing of these fiery waves,
There rest, if any rest can harbour there,
And reassembling our afflicted Powers,
Consult how we may henceforth most offend°
Our Enemy, our own loss how repair,
How overcome this dire Calamity,
What reinforcement we may gain from Hope,
If not what resolution from despare.
Thus Satan talking to his neerest Mate
With Head up-lift above the wave, and Eyes
That sparkling blaz’d, his other Parts besides
Prone on the Flood, extended long and large
Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge
As whom the Fables name of monstrous size,
Titanian, or Earth-born, that warr’d on Jove,
Briareos or Typhon, whom the Den
By ancient Tarsus held, or that Sea-beast
Leviathan, which God of all his works
Created hugest that swim th’ Ocean stream:
Him haply° slumbring on the Norway foam
The Pilot of some small night-founder’d° Skiff,
Deeming some Island, oft, as Sea-men tell,
With fixed Anchor in his skaly rind
Moors by his side under the Lee,° while Night
Invests° the Sea, and wished Morn delayes:
So stretcht out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay
Chain’d on the burning Lake, nor ever thence

17
satisfied

bluish

vex, harm

perhaps
benighted

out of the wind
covers

183–91. Five of these lines rhyme.
196 rood. An old unit of linear measure (6–8 yards), or the fourth part of an acre.
198–9. Both the Titans (led by “Briareos,” said to have a hundred hands) and the Giants, represented by “Typhon”
(who lived near Tarsus and was said to have a hundred serpent heads) made war on Jove. They were cast
into the underworld in punishment (Hesiod, Theogony 713–16, 820–85). Christian mythographers (and Milton)
often interpreted myths as analogues to the story of Satan’s rebellion and fall.
200–1. The whale, often identified with the great sea-monster and enemy of the Lord in Isa. 27:1, and the
crocodile-like dragon of Job 41:1–34, who is “king over all the children of pride.” Both were commonly
identified with Satan.
203–8. The story of the deceived sailor and the illusory island was a commonplace (see, e.g., Orlando Furioso
6.37–41) often applied to Satan.

18

215

220

225

230

235

240

245
 
Had ris’n or heav’d his head, but that the will
And high permission of all-ruling Heaven
Left him at large to his own dark designs,
That with reiterated crimes he might
Heap on himself damnation, while he sought
Evil to others, and enrag’d might see
How all his malice serv’d but to bring forth
Infinite goodness, grace and mercy shewn
On Man by him seduc’t, but on himself
Treble confusion, wrath and vengeance pour’d.
Forthwith upright he rears from off the Pool
His mighty Stature; on each hand the flames
Drivn backward slope thir pointing spires,° and rowld
In billows, leave i’th’ midst a horrid° Vale.
Then with expanded wings he stears his flight
Aloft, incumbent° on the dusky Air
That felt unusual weight, till on dry Land
He lights,° if it were Land that ever burn’d
With solid, as the Lake with liquid fire;
And such appear’d in hue, as when the force
Of subterranean wind transports a Hill
Torn from Pelorus, or the shatter’d side
Of thundring Ætna, whose combustible
And fewel’d entrals thence conceiving Fire,
Sublim’d° with Mineral fury, aid the Winds,
And leave a singed bottom all involv’d°
With stench and smoak: Such resting found the sole
Of unblest feet. Him followed his next Mate,
Both glorying to have scap’t the Stygian° flood
As Gods, and by thir own recover’d strength,
Not by the sufferance° of supernal Power.
Is this the Region, this the Soil, the Clime,
Said then the lost Arch-Angel, this the seat°
That we must change for Heav’n, this mournful gloom
For that celestial light? Be it so, since he
Who now is Sovran can dispose and bid
What shall be right: fardest from him is best
Whom reason hath equald, force hath made supream

points of flame
horrible, bristling
pressing
alights

vaporized
enveloped

Styxlike, hellish
permission
estate

230–7 subterranean wind. Thought to be the cause of earthquakes.
Pelorus. Cape Faro, a promontory on the east of Sicily, near the volcanic Mount “Ætna.” Cf. Aeneid 3.570 –7, Virgil’s description of Etna
darkening Pelorus with its smoke.

Book 1

250

255

260

265

270

275

280

Above his equals. Farewel happy Fields
Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail horrours, hail
Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell
Receive thy new Possessor: One who brings
A mind not to be chang’d by Place or Time.
The mind is its own place, and in it self
Can make a Heav’n of Hell, a Hell of Heav’n.
What matter where, if I be still the same,
And what I should be, all but less then° he
Whom Thunder hath made greater? Here at least
We shall be free; th’ Almighty hath not built
Here for his envy, will not drive us hence:
Here we may reign secure, and in my choyce
To reign is worth ambition though in Hell:
Better to reign in Hell, then serve in Heav’n.
But wherefore let we then our faithful friends,
Th’ associates and copartners of our loss
Lye thus astonisht° on th’ oblivious Pool,
And call them not to share with us their part
In this unhappy Mansion, or once more
With rallied Arms to try what may be yet
Regaind in Heav’n, or what more lost in Hell?
So Satan spake, and him Beelzebub
Thus answer’d. Leader of those Armies bright,
Which but th’ Onmipotent none could have foyld,
If once they hear that voyce, thir liveliest pledge
Of hope in fears and dangers, heard so oft
In worst extreams, and on the perilous edge°
Of battel when it rag’d, in all assaults
Thir surest signal, they will soon resume
New courage and revive, though now they lye
Groveling and prostrate on yon Lake of Fire,
As we erewhile, astounded and amaz’d,
No wonder, fall’n such a pernicious highth.
He scarce had ceas’t when the superiour Fiend
Was moving toward the shoar; his ponderous shield

19

scarcely less than

stunned

front lines

254–6. Compare Satan’s soliloquy, 4:75–8.
262–3. The sentiment, and its opposite, were proverbial. Cf. Phineas Fletcher, The Purple Island, 7.10, “In
heav’n they scorn’d to serve, so now in hell they reigne.” See also Abdiel (PL 6.183 –5).
266 oblivious pool. Suggests Lethe (forgetfulness), one of the classical rivers of Hades.
284–7. Cf. Achilles’ shield, Iliad 19.373.

20
 
285 Ethereal temper, massy,° large and round,

290

295

300

305

310

Behind him cast; the broad circumference
Hung on his shoulders like the Moon, whose Orb
Through Optic Glass the Tuscan Artist views
At Ev’ning from the top of Fesole,
Or in Valdarno, to descry new Lands,
Rivers or Mountains in her spotty Globe.
His Spear, to equal which the tallest Pine
Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the Mast
Of some great Ammiral,° were but a wand,
He walkt with to support uneasie steps
Over the burning Marle,° not like those steps
On Heavens Azure, and the torrid Clime
Smote on him sore besides, vaulted with Fire;
Nathless° he so endur’d, till on the Beach
Of that inflamed Sea, he stood and call’d
His Legions, Angel Forms, who lay intrans’t
Thick as Autumnal Leaves that strow the Brooks
In Vallombrosa, where th’ Etrurian shades
High overarch’t imbowr;° or scatterd sedge°
Afloat, when with fierce Winds Orion arm’d
Hath vext the Red-Sea Coast, whose waves orethrew
Busiris and his Memphian Chivalry,
While with perfidious hatred they pursu’d
The Sojourners of Goshen, who beheld
From the safe shore thir floating Carkases
And broken Chariot Wheels, so thick bestrown
Abject and lost lay these, covering the Flood,
Under amazement° of thir hideous change.
He call’d so loud, that all the hollow Deep

solid, weighty

admiral’s flagship
clay soil

nevertheless

form bowers / seaweed

stupefaction

285. Ethereal. Tempered with celestial fire.
288–91. Galileo studied the moon with a powerful telescope (“Optic Glass”) which as “Artist” (artifex) he
made. He did so from the hill town of Fiesole (“Fesole”) outside Florence and from the valley of the Arno
(“Valdarno”), in Tuscany. Milton visited him in 1638 or 1639.
292–4. Ships’ masts were customarily made from “Norwegian” fir trees. Cf. Homer’s comparison of
Polyphemus’ club to the mast of a “black ship” (Odyssey 9.322–3).
302–4 Similes comparing the numberless dead to fallen leaves are frequent in epic (e.g. Aeneid 6.309 –10).
Vallombrosa. Shady valley; a wooded region high in the Apennines, about 20 miles from Florence in the
region anciently known as “Etrurea.”
305–12. The constellation Orion (representing an armed giant) was associated with stormy weather (Amos
5:8; Aeneid 1.535, 7.719).
Busiris was a mythical Egyptian pharaoh identified by Milton with the pharaoh
of Exod. 14, who pursued the Israelites (formerly “Sojourners of Goshen” in Egypt) into the Red Sea; it
rolled back for them but inundated the Egyptians (“Memphian Chivalry”).

Book 1

21

315 Of Hell resounded. Princes, Potentates,

320

325

330

335

340

345

350

Warriers, the Flowr of Heav’n, once yours, now lost,
If such astonishment as this can sieze
Eternal spirits; or have ye chos’n this place
After the toyl of Battel to repose
Your wearied vertue,° for the ease you find
To slumber here, as in the Vales of Heav’n?
Or in this abject posture have ye sworn
To adore the Conquerour? who now beholds
Cherube and Seraph rowling° in the Flood
With scatter’d Arms and Ensigns,° till anon
His swift pursuers from Heav’n Gates discern
Th’ advantage, and descending tread us down
Thus drooping, or with linked Thunderbolts
Transfix us to the bottom of this Gulfe.
Awake, arise, or be for ever fall’n.
They heard, and were abasht, and up they sprung
Upon the wing, as when men wont° to watch
On duty, sleeping found by whom they dread,
Rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake.
Nor did they not perceave the evil plight
In which they were, or the fierce pains not feel;
Yet to thir Generals Voyce they soon obeyd
Innumerable. As when the potent Rod
Of Amrams Son in Egypts evill day
Wav’d round the Coast,° up call’d a pitchy cloud
Of Locusts, warping° on the Eastern Wind,
That ore the Realm of impious Pharaoh hung
Like Night, and darken’d all the Land of Nile:
So numberless were those bad Angels seen
Hovering on wing under the Cope° of Hell
’Twixt upper, nether, and surrounding Fires;
Till, as a signal giv’n, th’ uplifted Spear
Of thir great Sultan waving to direct
Thir course, in even ballance° down they light
On the firm brimstone, and fill all the Plain;
A multitude, like which the populous North

strength, valor

tossing about
battle flags

accustomed

region
floating

roof

perfect formation

338–43 Amrams Son. Moses (Exod. 6:20), who with his rod called down a plague of locusts on Egypt “so
that the land was darkened” (Exod. 10:12–15; PL 12.184 –8).
348 Sultan. The title of the Ottoman emperors, connoting despotism.
351–5. The barbarian invasions of Rome began with northern tribes crossing the Rhine (“Rhene”) and
Danube (“Danaw”) rivers, then spreading across Spain via “Gibralter” into North Africa (“Lybian sands”).

22

355

360

365

370

375

380

385
 
Pour’d never from her frozen loyns, to pass
Rhene or the Danaw, when her barbarous Sons
Came like a Deluge on the South, and spread
Beneath Gibralter to the Lybian sands.
Forthwith from every Squadron and each Band
The Heads and Leaders thither hast where stood
Thir great Commander; Godlike shapes and forms
Excelling human, Princely Dignities,
And Powers that earst° in Heaven sat on Thrones;
Though of thir Names in heav’nly Records now
Be no memorial, blotted out and ras’d°
By thir Rebellion, from the Books of Life.
Nor had they yet among the Sons of Eve
Got them new Names, till wandring ore the Earth,
Through Gods high sufferance for the tryal of man,
By falsities and lyes the greatest part
Of Mankind they corrupted to forsake
God thir Creator, and th’ invisible
Glory of him that made them, to transform
Oft to the Image of a Brute, adorn’d
With gay° Religions full of Pomp and Gold,
And Devils to adore for Deities:
Then were they known to men by various Names,
And various Idols through the Heathen World.
Say, Muse, thir Names then known, who first, who last,
Rous’d from the slumber, on that fiery Couch,
At thir great Emperors call, as next in worth
Came singly° where he stood on the bare strand,°
While the promiscuous° croud stood yet aloof ?
The chief were those who from the Pit of Hell
Roaming to seek thir prey on earth, durst fix
Thir Seats long after next the Seat of God,
Thir Altars by his Altar, Gods ador’d
Among the Nations round, and durst abide

formerly
erased

showy, specious

one at a time / shore
randomly mixed

363 Books of Life. Record of the names of the faithful (Rev. 3:5 and 21:27).
373. Tertullian, Origen, Augustine, and others identified the pagan gods with the fallen angels, and the belief
continued to Milton’s time.
376. The catalogue of the gods here is an epic convention. Homer catalogues commanders and ships, Virgil,
warriors; both begin with an invocation to the Muse (Iliad 2.484; Aeneid 7.641).
381–91. The first group of devil-idols settled in the Middle East, close neighbors of “Jehovah” whose seat was
in Jerusalem (“Sion”). Milton draws many details about them from John Selden’s De Diis Syris.

Book 1

390

395

400

405

410

Jehovah thundring out of Sion, thron’d
Between the Cherubim; yea, often plac’d
Within his Sanctuary it self thir Shrines,
Abominations; and with cursed things
His holy Rites, and solemn Feasts profan’d,
And with thir darkness durst affront° his light.
First Moloch, horrid King besmear’d with blood
Of human sacrifice, and parents tears,
Though for the noyse of Drums and Timbrels° loud
Thir childrens cries unheard, that past through fire
To his grim Idol. Him the Ammonite
Worshipt in Rabba and her watry Plain,
In Argob and in Basan, to the stream
Of utmost Arnon. Nor content with such
Audacious neighbourhood, the wisest heart
Of Solomon he led by fraud to build
His Temple right against the Temple of God
On that opprobrious° Hill, and made his Grove
The pleasant Vally of Hinnom, Tophet thence
And black Gehenna call’d, the Type° of Hell.
Next Chemos, th’ obscene dread° of Moabs Sons,
From Aroar to Nebo, and the wild
Of Southmost Abarim; in Hesebon
And Horonaim, Seons Realm, beyond
The flowry Dale of Sibma clad with Vines,
And Eleale to th’ Asphaltick Pool.
Peor his other Name, when he entic’d
Israel in Sittim on thir march from Nile

23

confront, defy

tambourines

polluted
figure
object of awe

386–7 Cherubim. Golden Cherubim adorned opposite ends of the gold cover on the Ark of the Covenant,
where Jehovah was “thron’d” (2 Kgs 19:15; Ps. 80:1).
392–9 Moloch. In Hebrew, “King.” A god of the Ammonites, usually represented with a calf ’s head crowned.
Rabba (“city of waters”) is modern Amman in Jordan; the towns “Argob” and “Basan,” and the river “Arnon”
lie east of the Dead Sea. Children were sacrificed by being placed alive in Moloch’s red-hot brazen image
while “Timbrels” sounded to cover their cries (2 Kgs 23:10).
403–5 that opprobrious Hill. 1 Kgs 11:7: the Mount of Olives. Under the names “Tophet” and “Gehenna,”
the “Valley of Hinnom” (2 Kgs 23:10) adjacent to Jerusalem became a “Type of Hell.” Groves throughout
the Old Testament are associated with idolatry.
406–11 Chemos. Moabite fertility god, associated with the phallic god Priapus; his priests were said to
defecate ritually before his shrine. Their lands (many taken from Isa. 15 –16) are mentioned in these lines.
Seon. Sihon, king of the Ammonites.
Asphaltick Pool. The Dead Sea. “Asphaltick” refers to its deposits
of bitumen.
412–14 Peor. The story of Peor seducing the Israelites in “Sittim” and the resulting “woe,” a plague killing
24,000, is told in Num. 25:1–9.

24

415

420

425

430

435

440
 
To do him wanton rites, which cost them woe.
Yet thence his lustful Orgies he enlarg’d
Even to that Hill of scandal, by the Grove
Of Moloch homicide, lust hard by hate;
Till good Josiah drove them thence to Hell.
With these came they, who from the bordring flood
Of old Euphrates to the Brook that parts
Egypt from Syrian ground, had general Names
Of Baalim and Ashtaroth, those male,
These Feminine. For Spirits when they please
Can either Sex assume, or both; so soft
And uncompounded is thir Essence pure,
Not ti’d or manacl’d with joynt or limb,
Nor founded on the brittle strength of bones,
Like cumbrous flesh; but in what shape they choose
Dilated or condens’t, bright or obscure,°
Can execute thir aerie purposes,
And works of love or enmity fulfill.
For those the Race of Israel oft forsook
Thir living strength, and unfrequented left
His righteous Altar, bowing lowly down
To bestial Gods; for which thir heads as low
Bow’d down in Battel, sunk before the Spear
Of despicable foes. With these in troop
Came Astoreth, whom the Phœnicians call’d
Astarte, Queen of Heav’n, with crescent Horns;
To whose bright Image nightly by the Moon
Sidonian Virgins paid thir Vows and Songs,
In Sion also not unsung, where stood
Her Temple on th’ offensive Mountain, built
By that uxorious King, whose heart though large,

dark

416 Hill of scandal. The Mount of Olives, where Solomon built temples to Chemos and Moloch (1 Kgs 11:7).
418 Josiah. A reforming king of Judah, Josiah destroyed the groves and idols of Moloch, Chemos, Astoreth,
and Bael (2 Kgs 23:4–14).
419–21. Palestine is bordered by the “Euphrates” on the east and the “Brook” of Besor on the Egyptian border (1 Sam. 30:10).
422 Baalim and Ashtaroth. Plural forms of the sun god Baal and the moon goddess Astoreth (438; “Astarte,”
439). Baal means Lord, and is used as a prefix, e.g., Baal-Peor.
439–41 Astarte. The Phoenician (“Sidonian,” from the city Sidon) original of Aphrodite, with a bull’s head
above her own from which sprang “crescent Horns” (Nativity Ode, 200).
443–6 th’ offensive Mountain. The Mount of Olives where “uxorious” King Solomon, whom God gave a
“large” heart, built a temple for “Astoreth” at the behest of his many wives (2 Kgs 23:13; 1 Kgs 4:29, 11:1–8).

Book 1

25

445 Beguil’d by fair Idolatresses, fell

450

455

460

465

470

To Idols foul. Thammuz came next behind,
Whose annual wound in Lebanon allur’d
The Syrian Damsels to lament his fate
In amorous dittyes all a Summers day,
While smooth Adonis from his native Rock
Ran purple to the Sea, suppos’d with blood
Of Thammuz yearly wounded: the Love-tale
Infected Sions daughters with like heat,
Whose wanton passions in the sacred Porch
Ezekiel saw, when by the Vision led
His eye survay’d the dark Idolatries
Of alienated Judah. Next came one
Who mourn’d in earnest, when the Captive Ark
Maim’d his brute Image, head and hands lopt off
In his own Temple, on the grunsel edge,°
Where he fell flat, and sham’d his Worshipers:
Dagon his Name, Sea Monster, upward Man
And downward Fish: yet had his Temple high
Rear’d in Azotus, dreaded through the Coast
Of Palestine, in Gath and Ascalon
And Accaron and Gaza’s frontier bounds.
Him follow’d Rimmon, whose delightful Seat
Was fair Damascus, on the fertil Banks
Of Abbana and Pharphar, lucid streams.
He also against the house of God was bold:
A Leper once he lost and gain’d a King,
Ahaz his sottish° Conquerour, whom he drew
Gods Altar to disparage and displace

threshold

foolish

446–52 Thammuz. A Syrian god; his Greek form was “Adonis,” beloved of Aphrodite, metamorphosed into
the anemone. Annual festivals identify his death in “Lebanon” from a boar’s wound and his revival, with
the death and rebirth of vegetation. Here, “Adonis” is a Lebanese river, so named because each July it
turned blood red from iron-rich clay.
455 Ezekiel. Ezek. 8:12–16 describes women’s “dark” idolatrous rites for Thammuz in the “Porch” and men’s
worship of the sun within the Temple.
457–63. When the Philistines stole the Ark of God they placed it in the temple of their sea-god, Dagon ( halfman, half-fish) but his statue fell down and broke in pieces (1 Sam. 5:1–5).
464–6. The five chief cities of the Philistines, sites of Dagon’s worship (see Zeph. 2:4): “Azotus” (Ashdod),
“Gath,” “Ascalon,” “Accaron” (Ekron), and “Gaza” (Azza).
467–76 Rimmon. The chief Syrian god. The Syrian general Naaman was cured of leprosy when (at the prophet
Elisha’s bidding) he bathed in the river Jordan and then renounced Rimmon (2 Kgs 5:1–19); “Abbana” and
“Pharphar” are rivers of “Damascus,” the chief city of Syria. King “Ahaz” of Judah conquered Syria but then
converted to Rimmon’s cult (2 Kgs 16:7–18).

26

475

480

485

490

495

500
 
For one of Syrian mode, whereon to burn
His odious off ’rings, and adore the Gods
Whom he had vanquisht. After these appear’d
A crew who under Names of old Renown,
Osiris, Isis, Orus and thir Train
With monstrous shapes and sorceries abus’d°
Fanatic Egypt and her Priests, to seek
Thir wandring Gods disguis’d in brutish forms
Rather then human. Nor did Israel scape
Th’ infection when thir borrow’d Gold compos’d
The Calf in Oreb: and the Rebel King
Doubl’d that sin in Bethel and in Dan,
Lik’ning his Maker to the Grazed Ox,
Jehovah, who in one Night when he pass’d
From Egypt marching, equal’d° with one stroke
Both her first born and all her bleating Gods.
Belial came last, then whom a Spirit more lewd
Fell not from Heaven, or more gross to love
Vice for it self: To him no Temple stood
Or Altar smoak’d; yet who more oft then hee
In Temples and at Altars, when the Priest
Turns Atheist, as did Ely’s Sons, who fill’d
With lust and violence the house of God.
In Courts and Palaces he also Reigns
And in luxurious Cities, where the noyse
Of riot° ascends above thir loftiest Towrs,
And injury and outrage: And when Night
Darkens the Streets, then wander forth the Sons
Of Belial, flown° with insolence and wine.

deceived

leveled

debauchery

flushed, swollen

477–82. The second group of devils includes gods originally driven from Olympus by the revolt of the giants
and forced to wander in “brutish” (animal) forms (Ovid, Metamorphoses 5.319–31). The Egyptians later worshiped such animal-headed gods: “Osiris,” a bull; “Isis,” a cow; “Orus” (Horus), a falcon.
482–4. While Moses was receiving the Law his brother Aaron made the “Calf in Oreb” with golden ornaments “borrow’d” (carried out of ) Egypt (Exod. 12:35); the Israelites worshiped the idol, traditionally identified
with the Egyptian god Apis (Exod. 32:1–4).
484–9 Rebel King. Jeroboam led ten tribes in a revolt against Solomon’s son Rehoboam, and “doubled” Aaron’s
sin by making two golden calves, one in “Bethel,” one in “Dan” (1 Kgs 12:19 –30); at the Passover, “Jehovah”
(Exod. 12:12) smote the Egyptian firstborn ( both men and beasts) and all their gods.
490–502 Belial. Hebrew for “worthlessness.” Not a god, but phrases such as “Sons of Belial” ( Judg. 19:22,
20:13, and 2 Cor. 6:15) encouraged personification. The sons of the high priest “Ely,” themselves priests,
were “sons of Belial,” seizing offerings meant for God and lying with prostitutes (1 Sam. 2:12 –22). Milton
invites association with Restoration churches, courts, and cities.

Book 1

505

510

515

520

525

530

Witness the Streets of Sodom, and that night
In Gibeah, when the hospitable door
Expos’d a Matron to avoid worse rape.
These were the prime in order and in might;
The rest were long to tell, though far renown’d,
Th’ Ionian Gods, of Javans Issue held
Gods, yet confest later then Heav’n and Earth
Thir boasted Parents; Titan Heav’ns first born
With his enormous° brood, and birthright seis’d
By younger Saturn, he from mightier Jove
His own and Rhea’s Son like measure found;
So Jove usurping reign’d: these first in Creet
And Ida known, thence on the Snowy top
Of cold Olympus rul’d the middle Air
Thir highest Heav’n; or on the Delphian Cliff,
Or in Dodona, and through all the bounds
Of Doric Land; or who with Saturn old
Fled over Adria to th’ Hesperian Fields,
And ore the Celtic roam’d the utmost Isles.
All these and more came flocking; but with looks
Down cast and damp,° yet such wherein appear’d
Obscure some glimps of joy, to have found thir chief
Not in despair, to have found themselves not lost
In loss it self; which on his count’nance cast
Like doubtful hue: but he his wonted° pride
Soon recollecting, with high words, that bore
Semblance of worth, not substance, gently rais’d
Thir fanting courage, and dispel’d thir fears.
Then strait° commands that at the warlike sound

27

monstrous

depressed

accustomed

immediately

503–5. Lot begged the Sodomites to rape his virgin daughters rather than his angel guests; no rape occurred,
and the angels destroyed “Sodom” (Gen. 19:1–10, 24). At “Gibeah” ( Judg. 19:22–9) an old man prevented
“worse” homosexual rape by surrendering his Levite guest’s concubine to “certain sons of Belial”; she was
raped all night and was found dead the next morning. The change from the biblical concubine to “a Matron”
heightens the crime.
508–10. The Ionian Greeks (“Javans issue,” i.e., of the line of Noah’s grandson Javan, son of Japhet) held the
Titans to be gods, supposedly the progeny of “Heav’n” (Uranus) and “Earth” (Gaea).
510–15 Titan. Titan, the firstborn, was deposed by his younger brother “Saturn” (or Cronos), who was in
turn deposed by his son “Jove” (Zeus) who had been reared in secret in a cave on Mount “Ida” in “Creet”
(Crete).
515–19. The Olympian gods dwelt on Mount “Olympus”; Apollo’s Pythian oracle was at Delphi (“Delphian
Cliff”), high on Mount Parnassus; “Dodona” was an ancient site of Zeus’ oracle; “Doric Land”: Greece.
519–21. The defeated “Saturn” fled over the Adriatic (“Adria”) to Italy (“th’ Hesperian Fields”), to France (“Celtic”
lands) to roam (“the utmost Isles”) of Britain.

28

535

540

545

550

555

560

565
 
Of Trumpets loud and Clarions° be upreard
His mighty Standard; that proud honour claim’d
Azazel as his right, a Cherube tall:
Who forthwith from the glittering Staff unfurld
Th’ Imperial Ensign,° which full high advanc’t
Shon like a Meteor streaming to the Wind
With Gemms and Golden lustre rich imblaz’d,°
Seraphic arms and Trophies: all the while
Sonorous mettal° blowing Martial sounds:
At which the universal Host upsent
A shout that tore Hells Concave,° and beyond
Frighted the Reign of Chaos and old Night.
All in a moment through the gloom were seen
Ten thousand Banners rise into the Air
With Orient° Colours waving: with them rose
A Forest huge of Spears: and thronging Helms
Appear’d, and serried° Shields in thick array
Of depth immeasurable: Anon they move
In perfect Phalanx to the Dorian mood
Of Flutes and soft Recorders; such as rais’d
To hight of noblest temper Hero’s old
Arming to Battel, and in stead of rage
Deliberate valour breath’d, firm and unmov’d
With dread of death to flight or foul retreat,
Nor wanting° power to mitigate and swage°
With solemn touches, troubl’d thoughts, and chase
Anguish and doubt and fear and sorrow and pain
From mortal or immortal minds. Thus they
Breathing united force with fixed thought
Mov’d on in silence to soft Pipes that charm’d
Thir painful steps o’re the burnt soyle; and now
Advanc’t in view, they stand, a horrid° Front
Of dreadful length and dazling Arms, in guise
Of Warriers old with order’d Spear and Shield,
Awaiting what command thir mighty Chief
Had to impose: He through the armed Files

small, shrill trumpets

battle flag
adorned with heraldic devices
trumpets
vault, roof

lustrous
pushed close together

lacking / assuage

bristling with spears

534 Azazel. Traditionally, one of the four standard-bearers of Satan’s army; a chief devil in the Book of Enoch.
543. For their “Reign” see 2.894–909, 959–70.
550–4 Phalanx. Greek battle formation consisting of footsoldiers presenting a square, impenetrable thicket
of spears, usually eight ranks deep.
Dorian mood. The Greek musical mode used for solemn
martial music, intended to produce calm firmness (Plato, Republic 3.399A). The Spartans (“Hero’s old”)
marched to battle to the Dorian music of “Flutes.”

Book 1

570

575

580

585

590

595

Darts his experienc’t eye, and soon traverse°
The whole Battalion views, thir order due,
Thir visages and stature as of Gods,
Thir number last he summs. And now his heart
Distends with pride, and hardning in his strength
Glories: For never since created man,
Met such imbodied force, as nam’d° with these
Could merit more then that small infantry
Warr’d on by Cranes: though all the Giant brood
Of Phlegra with th’ Heroic Race were joyn’d
That fought at Theb’s and Ilium, on each side
Mixt with auxiliar° Gods; and what resounds
In Fable or Romance of Uthers Son
Begirt with British and Armoric Knights;
And all who since, Baptiz’d or Infidel
Jousted in Aspramont or Montalban,
Damasco, or Marocco, or Trebisond,
Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore
When Charlemain with all his Peerage fell
By Fontarabbia. Thus far these beyond
Compare of mortal prowess, yet observ’d
Thir dread commander: he above the rest
In shape and gesture proudly eminent
Stood like a Towr; his form had yet not lost
All her Original brightness, nor appear’d
Less then Arch Angel ruind, and th’ excess
Of Glory obscur’d: As when the Sun new ris’n
Looks through the Horizontal° misty Air
Shorn of his Beams, or from behind the Moon

29
across

compared

allied

on the horizon

573 never since created man. i.e., since man was created (Latin idiom).
575–9. See Iliad 3.1–6 for the war of the pygmies (with a pun on “infantry,” infants) and the “Cranes.” The
Giants fought the Olympian gods at “Phlegra” in Macedonia (Pindar, Nemian Odes 1.67–8); the Greek armies
(“Heroic Race”) fought battles at “Theb’s” and “Ilium” (Troy), aided by various gods.
580–4. Armies from romances include “British” and “Armoric knights” (from Brittany) who fought with Arthur
(“Uthers Son”); and Charlemagne’s army that defeated the Saracens at “Aspramont” (the dark mountain).
Knightly jousts took place at the sites named, all from romances about chivalric wars between Christians
and Saracens: “Montalban” (the white mountain) the home of Rinaldo, “Damasco” (Damascus), “Marocco”
(Marrakesh, a sultanate in what is now Morocco), and “Trebisond” (Trabzon, a Byzantine city on the
Black Sea).
585–7. Saracens gathered at “Biserta” (Bizerte) in Tunisia to invade Spain (Boiardo, Orlando Innamorato 2.29.1–22);
Charlemagne’s rearguard, led by his best knight Roland, was massacred at Roncesvalles, near “Fontarabbia”
(Fuenterrabia, on the Spanish coast). But in no version of the story did Charlemagne himself fall.

30

600

605

610

615

620

625

630
 
In dim Eclips disastrous twilight sheds
On half the Nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes Monarchs. Dark’n’d so, yet shon
Above them all th’ Arch Angel: but his face
Deep scars of Thunder had intrencht, and care
Sat on his faded cheek, but under Browes
Of dauntless courage, and considerate° Pride
Waiting revenge: cruel his eye, but cast
Signs of remorse and passion to behold
The fellows of his crime, the followers rather
(Far other once beheld in bliss) condemn’d
For ever now to have thir lot in pain,
Millions of Spirits for his fault amerc’t°
Of Heav’n, and from Eternal Splendors flung
For his revolt, yet faithfull how they stood,
Thir Glory witherd. As when Heavens Fire
Hath scath’d° the Forrest Oaks, or Mountain Pines,
With singed top thir stately growth though bare
Stands on the blasted Heath. He now prepar’d
To speak; whereat thir doubl’d Ranks they bend
From wing to wing, and half enclose him round
With all his Peers: attention held them mute.
Thrice he assayd,° and thrice in spight of scorn,
Tears such as Angels weep, burst forth: at last
Words interwove with sighs found out thir way.
O Myriads of immortal Spirits, O Powers
Matchless, but with th’ Almighty, and that strife
Was not inglorious, though th’ event° was dire,
As this place testifies, and this dire change
Hateful to utter: but what power of mind
Foreseeing or presaging, from the Depth
Of knowledge past or present, could have fear’d,
How such united force of Gods, how such
As stood like these, could ever know repulse?
For who can yet beleeve, though after loss,
That all these puissant° Legions, whose exile
Hath emptied Heav’n, shall fail to re-ascend

conscious, deliberate

deprived

scorched

tried

outcome

powerful

597–9. The censor objected to these lines, as perhaps an allusion to the eclipse on the day of Charles II’s
birth, portending “change” (i.e., the Interregnum).
disastrous. astrologically unfavorable (dis + astrum).
620. Satan weeping before his defeated troops recalls Agamemnon stricken with grief in similar circumstances
(Iliad 9.13–14)

Book 1

635

640

645

650

655

660

665

670

Self-rais’d, and repossess thir native seat?
For mee be witness all the Host of Heav’n,
If counsels different, or danger shun’d
By me, have lost our hopes. But he who reigns
Monarch in Heav’n, till then as one secure
Sat on his Throne, upheld by old repute,
Consent or custome, and his Regal State
Put forth at full, but still° his strength conceal’d,
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall.
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own
So as not either to provoke, or dread
New warr, provok’t; our better part remains
To work in close° design, by fraud or guile
What force effected not: that he no less
At length from us may find, who overcomes
By force, hath overcome but half his foe.
Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rife°
There went a fame° in Heav’n that he ere long
Intended to create, and therein plant
A generation, whom his choice regard
Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven:
Thither, if but to prey, shall be perhaps
Our first eruption,° thither or elsewhere:
For this Infernal Pit shall never hold
Cælestial Spirits in Bondage, nor th’ Abyss
Long under darkness cover. But these thoughts
Full Counsel must mature: Peace is despaird,
For who can think Submission? Warr then, Warr
Open or understood° must be resolv’d.
He spake: and to confirm his words, out-flew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty Cherubim; the sudden blaze
Far round illumin’d hell: highly they rag’d
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arms
Clash’d on thir sounding Shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance toward the Vault of Heav’n.
There stood a Hill not far whose griesly° top
Belch’d fire and rowling° smoak; the rest entire
Shon with a glossie scurff,° undoubted sign
That in his womb was hid metallic Ore,

668. Like Roman legions, the fallen angels applaud by beating swords on shields.

31

always

secret

widespread
rumor

breaking out

covert

causing horror
undulating
crust

32

675

680

685

690

695

700

705
 
The work of Sulphur. Thither wing’d with speed
A numerous Brigad hasten’d. As when Bands
Of Pioners° with Spade and Pickax arm’d
Forerun the Royal Camp, to trench a Field,
Or cast a Rampart. Mammon led them on,
Mammon, the least erected Spirit that fell
From heav’n, for ev’n in heav’n his looks and thoughts
Were always downward bent, admiring more
The riches of Heav’ns pavement, trod’n Gold,
Then aught divine or holy else enjoy’d
In vision beatific: by him first
Men also, and by his suggestion taught,
Ransack’d the Center, and with impious hands
Rifl’d the bowels of thir mother Earth
For Treasures better hid. Soon had his crew
Op’nd into the Hill a spacious wound
And dig’d out ribs° of Gold. Let none admire°
That riches grow in Hell; that soyle may best
Deserve the precious bane.° And here let those
Who boast in mortal things, and wond’ring tell
Of Babel, and the works of Memphian Kings
Learn how thir greatest Monuments of Fame,
And Strength and Art are easily out-done
By Spirits reprobate,° and in an hour
What in an age they with incessant toyle
And hands innumerable scarce perform.
Nigh on the Plain in many cells prepar’d,
That underneath had veins of liquid fire
Sluc’d from the Lake, a second multitude
With wondrous Art founded° the massie Ore,
Severing each kind, and scum’d° the Bullion dross:°
A third as soon had form’d within the ground
A various mould, and from the boyling cells

military engineers

veins / wonder
poison

damned

melted
skimmed / boiling dregs

674 Sulphur. This was thought to be the father of metals.
678 Mammon. An Aramaic word for riches, Mammon came to be personified and associated with the god
of wealth, Plutus, and with Pluto, god of the underworld. Cf. Matt. 6:24: “Ye cannot serve God and
Mammon.”
684 vision beatific. Scholastic term for the sight of God, the greatest joy of heaven.
685–8. Ovid, Metamorphoses 1.138–42, describes men rifling earth’s “bowels” (“viscera terrae”) in search of
riches. Cf. Spenser, Faerie Queene 2.7.17.
694 Babel. The Tower of Babel (cf. Gen. 11:1–9; PL 12.38 – 62).
works. The Pyramids built by
“Memphian” (Egyptian) pharaohs.

Book 1

710

715

720

725

730

735

By strange conveyance fill’d each hollow nook,
As in an Organ from one blast of wind
To many a row of Pipes the sound-board breaths.
Anon out of the earth a Fabrick° huge
Rose like an Exhalation, with the sound
Of Dulcet° Symphonies and voices sweet,
Built like a Temple, where Pilasters° round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With Golden Architrave; nor did there want
Cornice or Freeze, with bossy° Sculptures grav’n,
The Roof was fretted° Gold. Not Babilon,
Nor great Alcairo such magnificence
Equal’d in all thir glories, to inshrine
Belus or Serapis thir Gods, or seat
Thir Kings, when Ægypt with Assyria strove
In wealth and luxurie. Th’ ascending pile°
Stood fixt° her stately highth, and strait° the dores
Op’ning thir brazen foulds discover wide
Within, her ample spaces, o’re the smooth
And level pavement: from the arched roof
Pendant by suttle Magic many a row
Of Starry Lamps and blazing Cressets fed
With Naphtha and Asphaltus yeilded light
As from a sky. The hasty multitude
Admiring enter’d, and the work some praise
And some the Architect: his hand was known
In Heav’n by many a Towred structure high,
Where Scepter’d Angels held thir residence,
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule,
Each in his Hierarchie, the Orders bright.

33

building
sweet, pleasing
columns set in a wall

embossed
richly ornamented

large building
complete / at once

711–12 Exhalation. Exhalations were thought to cause comets and meteors ( bad omens) and pestilence
(cf. 10.693–5). Pandæmonium rises to symphonic and vocal music, like Thebes to Amphion’s lyre.
714 Doric pillars. Round and fluted, Doric pillars are severe and plain. Pandæmonium combines classical architectural features with elaborate ornamentation, perhaps suggesting St. Peter’s in Rome.
715–16 Architrave. The beam that rests on top of the columns.
Cornice. The part above and overhanging the frieze.
Freeze. The frieze: the architectural element above the architrave on which
the sculptures usually are set.
717–20 Babilon. Babylon in Assyria had temples to “Belus” (Baal); “Alcairo” (ancient Memphis, near Cairo) had
temples to “Serapis” (composite of Osiris and Apis, the bull god). Both cities were famously magnificent.
728–9 Cressets. Iron baskets hung from the ceiling, holding burning pitch (“Asphaltus”); oily “Naphtha” was
placed in the lamps.

34

740

745

750

755

760

765

770
 
Nor was his name unheard or unador’d
In ancient Greece; and in Ausonian land
Men call’d him Mulciber; and how he fell
From Heav’n, they fabl’d, thrown by angry Jove
Sheer o’re the Chrystal Battlements; from Morn
To Noon he fell, from Noon to dewy Eve,
A Summers day; and with the setting Sun
Dropt from the Zenith like a falling Star,
On Lemnos th’ Ægean Ile: thus they relate,
Erring; for he with this rebellious rout
Fell long before; nor aught avail’d him now
To have built in Heav’n high Towrs; nor did he scape
By all his Engins,° but was headlong sent
With his industrious crew to build in hell.
Mean while the winged Haralds by command
Of Sovran power, with awful° Ceremony
And Trumpets sound throughout the Host proclaim
A solemn Councel forthwith to be held
At Pandæmonium, the high Capital
Of Satan and his Peers:° thir summons call’d
From every Band and squared Regiment
By place° or choice° the worthiest; they anon
With hunderds and with thousands trooping came
Attended: all access was throng’d, the Gates
And Porches wide, but chief the spacious Hall
(Though like a cover’d field, where Champions bold
Wont° ride in arm’d, and at the Soldans° chair
Defi’d the best of Panim° chivalry
To mortal combat or carreer° with Lance)
Thick swarm’d, both on the ground and in the air,
Brusht with the hiss of russling wings. As Bees
In spring time, when the Sun with Taurus rides,
Pour forth thir populous youth about the Hive

contrivances

awesome

nobles, companions
rank / election

were accustomed to / sultan’s
pagan
joust

738–46. Hephæstus (in “Greece”), Vulcan or “Mulciber” in Italy (“Ausonian land”), was architect of the classical gods’ palaces; the story of his fall, cast out by Zeus (“angry Jove”) to land in “Lemnos” in the “Ægean”
sea, is told in Iliad 1.590–4.
Zenith. the highest point of the celestial sphere.
747 Erring. Milton thought the classical myths were erroneous versions of biblical stories.
756 Pandæmonium. Milton’s coinage, literally “all Demons,” an inversion of Pantheon, “all gods.”
768–76. Bee similes were common in epic from Homer on (Iliad 2.87–90; Aeneid 1.430–6); also, the bees’ (royalist) society was often cited in political arguments. The simile prepares for the sudden contraction of the
“common” devils, enabling them to fit into the Hall of Pandæmonium (791–2).
769. The sun is in the zodiacal sign of “Taurus” (the Bull) from about April 19 to May 20.

Book 1

775

780

785

790

795

In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers
Flie to and fro, or on the smoothed Plank,
The suburb of thir Straw-built Cittadel,
New rub’d with Baum, expatiate° and confer
Thir State affairs. So thick the aerie crowd
Swarm’d and were straitn’d;° till the Signal giv’n.
Behold a wonder! they but now who seemd
In bigness to surpass Earths Giant Sons
Now less then smallest Dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberless, like that Pigmean Race
Beyond the Indian Mount, or Faerie Elves,
Whose midnight Revels, by a Forrest side
Or Fountain some belated Peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while over-head the Moon
Sits Arbitress,° and neerer to the Earth
Wheels her pale course, they on thir mirth and dance
Intent, with jocond° Music charm his ear;
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms
Reduc’d thir shapes immense, and were at large,
Though without number still amidst the Hall
Of that infernal Court. But far within
And in thir own dimensions like themselves
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim
In close° recess and secret conclave sat
A thousand Demy-Gods on golden seat’s,
Frequent and full. After short silence then
And summons read, the great consult began.

35

walk about at large
packed together

The End of the First Book.

780–1 Pigmean Race. Pygmies were thought to live beyond the Himalayas (“the Indian Mount”).
792–4. These “Lords” retained their own size.
795 conclave. Secret assembly, often ecclesiastical.
797 Frequent. Crowded together.
full. In great number.

witness
merry

secluded

Figure 4

Illustration to Book 2, 1688

BOOK 2
THE ARGUMENT
The Consultation begun, Satan debates whether another Battel be to be hazarded
for the recovery of Heaven: some advise it, others dissuade: A third proposal is prefer’d,
mention’d before by Satan, to search the truth of that Prophesie or Tradition in Heaven
concerning another world, and another kind of creature equal or not much inferiour
5 to themselves, about this time to be created: Thir doubt who shall be sent on this
difficult search: Satan thir chief undertakes alone the voyage, is honourd and
applauded. The Councel thus ended, the rest betake them several wayes and to several imployments, as thir inclinations lead them, to entertain the time till Satan return.
He passes on his journey to Hell Gates, finds them shut, and who sat there to guard
10 them, by whom at length they are op’nd, and discover to him the great Gulf
between Hell and Heaven; with what difficulty he passes through, directed by Chaos,
the Power of that place, to the sight of this new World which he sought.

High on a Throne of Royal State, which far
Outshon the wealth of Ormus and of Ind,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showrs on her Kings Barbaric Pearl and Gold,
5 Satan exalted sat, by merit rais’d
To that bad eminence; and from despair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue
Vain Warr with Heav’n, and by success° untaught
10 His proud imaginations thus displaid.
Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heav’n,
For since no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigor, though opprest and fall’n,
I give not Heav’n for lost. From this descent
15 Celestial vertues rising, will appear

the outcome

1. A typical epic convention (in e.g. Iliad 2.53–394, Aeneid 11.302– 446, Tasso, Gerusalemme Liberata 2.58 – 90)
involved councils debating war and peace, with spokesmen on each side. Infernal councils have
antecedents in Tasso, Vida, Valvasone, and others.
11–12. Satan is given directions by “Chaos,” the ruler (“Power”) of “that place” (Chaos) to the created universe (“new World”).
2 Ormus. Hormuz, an island port at the mouth of the Persian Gulf, famous for pearls.
4 Barbaric. Exotic; pertaining originally to all nations except Greece and Rome.
5 merit. Desert, either good or bad. Cf. 3.309–10, 6.43.
11 Powers and Dominions. Angelic orders; “vertues” (15) were also an angelic order. Milton retains the
names but not the arrangement into distinct hierarchical ranks.

38

20

25

30

35

40

45

50
 
More glorious and more dread then from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate:
Mee though just right, and the fixt Laws of Heav’n
Did first create your Leader, next free choice,
With what besides, in Counsel or in Fight,
Hath bin achievd of merit, yet this loss
Thus farr at least recover’d, hath much more
Establisht in a safe unenvied Throne
Yielded with full consent. The happier state
In Heav’n, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior; but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Formost to stand against the Thunderers aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? where there is then no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From Faction; for none sure will claim in Hell
Precedence, none, whose portion is so small
Of present pain, that with ambitious mind
Will covet more. With this advantage then
To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord,
More then can be in Heav’n, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper then prosperity
Could have assur’d us; and by what best way,
Whether of open Warr or covert guile,
We now debate; who can advise, may speak.
He ceas’d, and next him Moloc, Scepter’d King
Stood up, the strongest and the fiercest Spirit
That fought in Heav’n; now fiercer by despair:
His trust was with th’ Eternal to be deem’d
Equal in strength, and rather then be less
Care’d not to be at all; with that care lost
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse
He reck’d° not, and these words thereafter spake.
My sentence° is for open Warr: Of Wiles,
More unexpert,° I boast not: them let those

cared
judgment
inexperienced

28 Thunderer. The attribute of Zeus ( Jove) is the thunderbolt.
41. The classic Machiavellian choice for gaining or extending power. Tasso’s Satan (Gerusalemme Liberata, trans.
Edward Fairfax [1600], 4.16–17) also proposes “open force, or secret guile.”

Book 2

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

Contrive who need, or when they need, not now
For while they sit contriving, shall the rest,
Millions that stand in Arms, and longing wait
The Signal to ascend, sit lingring here
Heav’ns fugitives, and for thir dwelling place
Accept this dark opprobrious° Den of shame,
The Prison of his Tyranny who Reigns
By our delay? no, let us rather choose
Arm’d with Hell flames and fury all at once
O’re Heav’ns high Towrs to force resistless way,
Turning our Tortures into horrid° Arms
Against the Torturer; when to meet the noise
Of his Almighty Engin° he shall hear
Infernal Thunder, and for Lightning see
Black fire and horror shot with equal rage
Among his Angels; and his Throne it self
Mixt with Tartarean Sulphur, and strange fire,
His own invented Torments. But perhaps
The way seems difficult and steep to scale
With upright wing against a higher foe.
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench°
Of that forgetful Lake benumm not still,
That in our proper° motion we ascend
Up to our native seat: descent and fall
To us is adverse. Who but felt of late
When the fierce Foe hung on our brok’n Rear°
Insulting,° and pursu’d us through the Deep,
With what compulsion and laborious flight
We sunk thus low? Th’ ascent is easie then;
Th’ event° is fear’d; should we again provoke
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find
To our destruction: if there be in Hell
Fear to be worse destroy’d: what can be worse
Then to dwell here, driv’n out from bliss, condemn’d
In this abhorred deep to utter woe;
Where pain of unextinguishable fire
Must exercise° us without hope of end

39

infamous

bristling, terrible
machine of war

soporific drink
natural

rearguard
attacking, exulting scornfully

69 Tartarean. Hellish. Tartarus is the place of punishment in the classical underworld.
74 forgetful Lake. Suggests Lethe, the river of oblivion in Hades. Cf. 1.266.
75. Cf. 2.932–5.

outcome

afflict

40
 
90 The Vassals° of his anger, when the Scourge

95

100

105

110

115

120

125

Inexorably, and the torturing hour
Calls us to Penance? More destroy’d then thus
We should be quite abolisht and expire.
What fear we then? what doubt we to incense
His utmost ire? which to the highth enrag’d,
Will either quite consume us, and reduce
To nothing this essential,° happier farr
Then miserable to have eternal being:
Or if our substance be indeed Divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are at worst
On this side nothing;° and by proof we feel
Our power sufficient to disturb his Heav’n,
And with perpetual inrodes to Allarme,
Though inaccessible, his fatal° Throne:
Which if not Victory is yet Revenge.
He ended frowning, and his look denounc’d°
Desperate revenge, and Battel dangerous
To less then Gods. On th’ other side up rose
Belial, in act more graceful and humane;
A fairer person lost not Heav’n; he seemd
For dignity compos’d and high exploit:
But all was false and hollow; though his Tongue
Dropt Manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest Counsels: for his thoughts were low;
To vice industrious, but to Nobler deeds
Timorous and slothful: yet he pleas’d the ear,
And with perswasive accent thus began.
I should be much for open Warr, O Peers,
As not behind in hate; if what was urg’d
Main reason to persuade immediate Warr,
Did not disswade me most, and seem to cast
Ominous conjecture on the whole success:
When he who most excels in fact° of Arms,
In what he counsels and in what excels
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair

slaves

essence

short of annihilation

fated, death-dealing
proclaimed

feat

90–2 Scourge . . . Penance. Suggest Roman Catholic practices of mortification.
113–14 Manna. The food supplied to the Israelites in the desert, tasting of honey. For making “the worse
appear / The better reason” Belial is aligned with the Sophists, mercenary teachers of rhetoric in ancient
Greece, who were denounced by Plato for just this practice (Apology 19b).

Book 2

130

135

140

145

150

155

160

And utter dissolution, as the scope
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
First, what Revenge? the Towrs of Heav’n are fill’d
With Armed watch, that render all access
Impregnable; oft on the bordering Deep
Encamp thir Legions, or with obscure wing
Scout farr and wide into the Realm of night,
Scorning surprize. Or could we break our way
By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise
With blackest Insurrection, to confound
Heav’ns purest Light, yet our great Enemy
All incorruptible would on his Throne
Sit unpolluted, and th’ Ethereal mould
Incapable of stain would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire
Victorious. Thus repuls’d, our final hope
Is flat° despair: we must exasperate
Th’ Almighty Victor to spend all his rage,
And that must end us, that must be our cure,
To be no more; sad cure; for who would loose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Those thoughts that wander through Eternity,
To perish rather, swallowd up and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated night,
Devoid of sense and motion? and who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? how he can
Is doubtful; that he never will is sure.
Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
Belike° through impotence, or unaware,
To give his Enemies thir wish, and end
Them in his anger, whom his anger saves
To punish endless? wherefore cease we then?
Say they who counsel Warr, we are decreed,
Reserv’d and destin’d to Eternal woe;
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
What can we suffer worse? is this then worst,

41

absolute

perhaps

139 Ethereal mould. Heavenly substance, derived from “ether,” the fifth and purest element, supposed incorruptible.
148. Cf. Seneca, De Consolatione Ad Marciam 11.4–5, describing the capacity of thoughts to range through
heaven and all past and future time.

42

165

170

175

180

185

190

195
 
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in Arms?
What when we fled amain,° pursu’d and strook
With Heav’ns afflicting Thunder, and besought
The Deep to shelter us? this Hell then seem’d
A refuge from those wounds: or when we lay
Chain’d on the burning Lake? that sure was worse.
What if the breath that kindl’d those grim fires
Awak’d should blow them into sevenfold rage
And plunge us in the flames? or from above
Should intermitted° vengeance arm again
His red right hand to plague us? what if all
Her stores were open’d, and this Firmament°
Of Hell should spout her Cataracts° of Fire,
Impendent° horrors, threatning hideous fall
One day upon our heads; while we perhaps
Designing or exhorting glorious warr,
Caught in a fierie Tempest shall be hurl’d
Each on his rock transfixt, the sport and prey
Of racking° whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boyling Ocean, wrapt in Chains;
There to converse with everlasting groans,
Unrespited, unpitied, unrepreevd,
Ages of hopeless end;° this would be worse.
Warr therefore, open or conceal’d, alike
My voice disswades; for what can force or guile
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
Views all things at one view? he from heav’ns highth
All these our motions° vain, sees and derides;
Not more Almighty to resist our might
Then wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we then live thus vile, the Race of Heav’n
Thus trampl’d, thus expell’d to suffer here
Chains and these Torments? better these then worse
By my advice; since fate inevitable
Subdues us, and Omnipotent Decree,

at full speed

suspended
vault
cascades
hanging down

driving, torturing

without hope for an end

proposals, plans

170–4. For Belial’s questions, cf. Tasso, Gerusalemme Liberata 10.44 –7. For God’s “ breath that kindled” cf.
Isa. 30:33, “the pile [of Hell] is fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone,
doth kindle it.” For God’s “red right hand” cf. Horace, Odes 1.2.1– 4, Jove hurling thunderbolts with a “red
right hand.”
190–1. “He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision” (Ps. 2:4). Milton’s
God is not passionless, but displays a range of emotions, see Christian Doctrine 1.2.

Book 2

200

205

210

215

220

225

230

235

The Victors will. To suffer, as to doe,
Our strength is equal, nor the Law unjust
That so ordains: this was at first resolv’d,
If we were wise, against so great a foe
Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh, when those who at the Spear are bold
And vent’rous, if that fail them, shrink and fear
What yet they know must follow, to endure
Exile, or ignominy,° or bonds, or pain,
The sentence of thir Conquerour: This is now
Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear,
Our Supream Foe in time may much remit
His anger, and perhaps thus farr remov’d
Not mind us not offending, satisfi’d
With what is punish’t; whence these raging fires
Will slack’n, if his breath stir not thir flames.
Our purer essence then will overcome
Thir noxious vapour, or enur’d° not feel,
Or chang’d at length, and to the place conformd
In temper° and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain;
This horror will grow milde, this darkness light,
Besides what hope the never-ending flight
Of future dayes may bring, what chance, what change
Worth waiting, since our present lot appeers
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,
If we procure not to our selves more woe.
Thus Belial with words cloath’d in reasons garb
Counsell’d ignoble ease, and peaceful sloath,
Not peace: and after him thus Mammon spake.
Either to disinthrone the King of Heav’n
We warr, if warr be best, or to regain
Our own right lost: him to unthrone we then
May hope when everlasting Fate shall yeild
To fickle Chance, and Chaos judge the strife:
The former vain to hope argues as vain
The latter: for what place can be for us

43

humiliation

accustomed
physical and mental constitution

199–200. Echoing Mucius Scaevola’s famous words, when he held his hand in the fire to demonstrate Roman
fortitude (Livy, Ab Urbe Condita 2.12.10).
212 mind. Be concerned about; be aware of.
220 light. May be a noun, the opposite of darkness, or an adjective, “easy to bear.”

44

240

245

250

255

260

265

270

275
 
Within Heav’ns bound, unless Heav’ns Lord supream
We overpower? Suppose he should relent
And publish Grace to all, on promise made
Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we
Stand in his presence humble, and receive
Strict Laws impos’d, to celebrate his Throne
With warbl’d Hymns, and to his Godhead sing
Forc’t Halleluiah’s; while he Lordly sits
Our envied Sovran, and his Altar breathes
Ambrosial° Odours and Ambrosial Flowers,
Our servile offerings. This must be our task
In Heav’n this our delight; how wearisom
Eternity so spent in worship paid
To whom we hate. Let us not then pursue
By force impossible, by leave obtain’d
Unacceptable, though in Heav’n, our state
Of splendid vassalage,° but rather seek
Our own good from our selves, and from our own
Live to our selves, though in this vast recess,
Free, and to none accountable, preferring
Hard liberty before the easie yoke
Of servile Pomp. Our greatness will appeer
Then most conspicuous, when great things of small,
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse
We can create, and in what place so e’re
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain
Through labour and indurance. This deep world
Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst
Thick clouds and dark doth Heav’ns all-ruling Sire
Choose to reside, his Glory unobscur’d,
And with the Majesty of darkness round
Covers his Throne; from whence deep thunders roar
Must’ring thir rage, and Heav’n resembles Hell?
As he our darkness, cannot we his Light
Imitate when we please? This Desart soile
Wants° not her hidden lustre, Gemms and Gold;
Nor want we skill or Art, from whence to raise
Magnificence; and what can Heav’n shew more?
Our torments also may in length of time
Become our Elements, these piercing Fires

fragrant, divine

servitude

lacks

252–60. Mammon echoes the Stoic stance of Horace (Epistles 1.18.107–10) but not his proposed simple lifestyle.

Book 2

280

285

290

295

300

305

310

As soft as now severe, our temper chang’d
Into their temper; which must needs remove
The sensible of pain. All things invite
To peaceful Counsels, and the settl’d State
Of order, how in safety best we may
Compose° our present evils, with regard
Of what we are and where, dismissing quite
All thoughts of warr: ye have what I advise.
He scarce had finisht, when such murmur filld
Th’ Assembly, as when hollow Rocks retain
The sound of blustring winds, which all night long
Had rous’d the Sea, now with hoarse cadence lull
Sea-faring men orewatcht,° whose Bark by chance
Or Pinnace° anchors in a craggy Bay
After the Tempest: Such applause was heard
As Mammon ended, and his Sentence pleas’d,
Advising peace: for such another Field
They dreaded worse then Hell: so much the fear
Of Thunder and the Sword of Michael
Wrought still within them; and no less desire
To found this nether Empire, which might rise
By pollicy,° and long process of time,
In emulation opposite to Heav’n.
Which when Beelzebub perceiv’d, then whom,
Satan except, none higher sat, with grave
Aspect he rose, and in his rising seem’d
A Pillar of State; deep on his Front° engraven
Deliberation sat and public care;
And Princely counsel in his face yet shon,
Majestic though in ruin: sage he stood
With Atlantean shoulders fit to bear
The weight of mightiest Monarchies; his look
Drew audience and attention still as Night
Or Summers Noon-tide air, while thus he spake.
Thrones and Imperial Powers, off-spring of heav’n,
Ethereal Vertues; or these Titles now

45

adjust to

worn out from watching
small light boat

statecraft

forehead

278. Pain felt by the senses.
294 Michael. Traditionally, the chief of the angelic armies, cf. 6.250ff, 320ff.
306 Atlantean. Burdened statesmen were often compared to Atlas the Titan, whose rebellion Jove punished
by forcing him to bear the heavens on his shoulders.
310–11. Angelic orders. See note to line 11, above.

46

315

320

325

330

335

340

345
 
Must we renounce, and changing stile be call’d
Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote
Inclines, here to continue, and build up here
A growing Empire; doubtless; while we dream,
And know not that the King of Heav’n hath doom’d
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat
Beyond his Potent arm, to live exempt
From Heav’ns high jurisdiction, in new League
Banded against his Throne, but to remaine
In strictest bondage, though thus far remov’d,
Under th’ inevitable curb, reserv’d
His captive multitude: For he, be sure,
In heighth or depth, still first and last will Reign
Sole King, and of his Kingdom loose no part
By our revolt, but over Hell extend
His Empire, and with Iron Scepter rule
Us here, as with his Golden those in Heav’n.
What° sit we then projecting peace and Warr?
Warr hath determin’d us, and foild with loss
Irreparable; tearms of peace yet none
Voutsaf ’t° or sought; for what peace will be giv’n
To us enslav’d, but custody severe,
And stripes, and arbitrary punishment
Inflicted? and what peace can we return,
But to° our power hostility and hate,
Untam’d reluctance,° and revenge though slow,
Yet ever plotting how the Conqueror least
May reap his conquest, and may least rejoyce
In doing what we most in suffering feel?
Nor will occasion want,° nor shall we need
With dangerous expedition to invade
Heav’n, whose high walls fear no assault or Siege,
Or ambush from the Deep. What if we find
Some easier enterprize? There is a place
(If ancient and prophetic fame° in Heav’n
Err not) another World, the happy seat
Of some new Race call’d Man, about this time

why

granted

to the extent of
resistance

be lacking

rumor

327–8. God’s iron scepter symbolizes Justice, his golden scepter, Mercy. Cf. Rev. 19:15, “he shall rule them
with a rod of iron.” In 1653 Milton translated Ps. 2:9 with the phrase, “ With iron scepter bruised.” See
PL 5.886–7.

Book 2

350

355

360

365

370

375

380

To be created like to us, though less
In power and excellence, but favour’d more
Of him who rules above; so was his will
Pronounc’d among the Gods,° and by an Oath,
That shook Heav’ns whol circumference, confirm’d.
Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould,
Or substance, how endu’d,° and what thir Power,
And where thir weakness, how attempted° best,
By force or suttlety: Though Heav’n be shut,
And Heav’ns high Arbitrator sit secure
In his own strength, this place may lye expos’d
The utmost border of his Kingdom, left
To their defence who hold it: here perhaps
Som advantagious act may be achiev’d
By sudden onset, either with Hell fire
To waste his whole Creation, or possess
All as our own, and drive as we were driven,
The punie habitants, or if not drive,
Seduce them to our Party, that thir God
May prove thir foe, and with repenting hand
Abolish his own works. This would surpass
Common revenge, and interrupt his joy
In our Confusion, and our Joy upraise
In his disturbance; when his darling Sons
Hurl’d headlong to partake with us, shall curse
Thir frail Original,° and faded bliss,
Faded so soon. Advise if this be worth
Attempting, or to sit in darkness here
Hatching vain Empires. Thus Beelzebub
Pleaded his devilish Counsel, first devis’d
By Satan, and in part propos’d: for whence,
But from the Author of all ill could Spring
So deep a malice, to confound° the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell
To mingle and involve,° done all to spite

47

angels

endowed
attacked, tempted

originator, parent

ruin
entangle

349–50. Cf. Ps. 8:5: “For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels.” See PL 1.654, 8.228.
352–3. In classical epic the heavens shake when the king of the gods (Zeus, Jove) takes an oath.
369–70. Gen. 6:7, God determining to destroy the world by flood: “And the Lord said, I will destroy man
[and all the creatures] . . . for it repenteth me that I have made them.”
383. Adam is the “root” of the human family tree.

48
 
385 The great Creatour? But thir spite still serves

390

395

400

405

410

415

420

His glory to augment. The bold design
Pleas’d highly those infernal States,° and joy
Sparkl’d in all thir eyes; with full assent
They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews.
Well have ye judg’d, well ended long debate,
Synod° of Gods, and like to what ye are,
Great things resolv’d, which from the lowest deep
Will once more lift us up, in spight of Fate,
Neerer our ancient Seat; perhaps in view
Of those bright confines, whence with neighbouring Arms
And opportune excursion we may chance
Re-enter Heav’n; or else in some milde Zone
Dwell not unvisited of Heav’ns fair Light
Secure, and at the brightning Orient beam
Purge off this gloom; the soft delicious Air,
To heal the scarr of these corrosive Fires
Shall breathe her balme. But first whom shall we send
In search of this new world, whom shall we find
Sufficient? who shall tempt° with wandring feet
The dark unbottom’d infinite Abyss
And through the palpable obscure find out
His uncouth° way, or spread his aerie flight
Upborn with indefatigable wings
Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive
The happy Ile; what strength, what art can then
Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe
Through the strict Senteries° and Stations° thick
Of Angels watching round? Here he had need
All circumspection, and wee now no less
Choice° in our suffrage; for on whom we send,
The weight of all and our last hope relies.
This said, he sat; and expectation held
His look suspence,° awaiting who appeer’d
To second, or oppose, or undertake
The perilous attempt; but all sat mute,

nobles

assembly

attempt, try

unknown

sentries / guardposts

discrimination

in suspension

406 palpable obscure. Darkness so thick it can be felt (cf. Exod. 10:21).
409 vast abrupt. An abyss, referring to Chaos, the gulf between two created places, heaven and hell.
410 happy Ile. Earth, with probable allusion to the Isles of the Blessed in Greek mythology.
420. Cf. 3.217.

Book 2

425

430

435

440

445

450

455

Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each
In others count’nance read his own dismay
Astonisht:° none among the choice and prime
Of those Heav’n-warring Champions could be found
So hardie as to proffer or accept
Alone the dreadful voyage; till at last
Satan, whom now transcendent glory rais’d
Above his fellows, with Monarchal pride
Conscious of highest worth, unmov’d thus spake.
O Progeny of Heav’n, Empyreal Thrones,
With reason hath deep silence and demurr°
Seis’d us, though undismaid: long is the way
And hard, that out of Hell leads up to light;
Our prison strong, this huge convex° of Fire,
Outrageous° to devour, immures us round
Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant
Barr’d over us prohibit all egress.
These past, if any pass, the void profound
Of unessential° Night receives him next
Wide gaping, and with utter loss of being
Threatens him, plung’d in that abortive gulf.
If thence he scape into whatever world,
Or unknown Region, what remains him less°
Then unknown dangers and as hard escape.
But I should ill become this Throne, O Peers,°
And this Imperial Sov’ranty, adorn’d
With splendor, arm’d with power, if aught propos’d
And judg’d of public moment,° in the shape
Of difficulty or danger could deterr
Mee from attempting. Wherefore do I assume
These Royalties,° and not refuse to Reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honour, due alike
To him who Reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more, as he above the rest

49

stunned

delay

vault
furious

without being

awaits him except
nobles, companions

importance

royal prerogatives

427–66. Cf. the Son’s parallel offer, 3.222–65.
432–3. An echo of the Sybil’s warning to Aeneas, Aeneid 6.126 – 9.
435–6. Hell’s fiery walls have nine thicknesses that “immure” the fallen angels.
Adamant. A substance
of impenetrable hardness.
441 abortive gulf. Chaos is a womb in which all potential forms fragment (cf. 900ff ).
450–66. An ironic recasting of the noble speech of Sarpedon to Glaucus (Iliad 12.310 –28).

50

460

465

470

475

480

485

490

495
 
High honourd sits? Go therefore mighty Powers,
Terror of Heav’n, though fall’n; intend° at home,
While here shall be our home, what best may ease
The present misery, and render Hell
More tollerable; if there be cure or charm
To respite° or deceive,° or slack the pain
Of this ill Mansion: intermit no watch
Against a wakeful Foe, while I abroad
Through all the Coasts° of dark destruction seek
Deliverance for us all: this enterprize
None shall partake with me. Thus saying rose
The Monarch, and prevented° all reply,
Prudent, least from his resolution rais’d°
Others among the chief might offer now
(Certain to be refus’d) what erst° they fear’d;
And so refus’d might in opinion stand
His Rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge must earn. But they
Dreaded not more th’ adventure then his voice
Forbidding; and at once with him they rose;
Thir rising all at once was as the sound
Of Thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend
With awful° reverence prone; and as a God
Extoll him equal to the highest in Heav’n:
Nor fail’d they to express how much they prais’d,
That for the general safety he despis’d
His own: for neither do the Spirits damn’d
Loose all thir vertue; least bad men should boast
Thir specious° deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or clos° ambition varnisht o’re with zeal.
Thus they thir doubtful consultations dark
Ended rejoycing in thir matchless Chief:
As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds
Ascending, while the North wind sleeps, o’respread
Heav’ns chearful face, the lowring Element°
Scowls ore the dark’nd lantskip° Snow, or showre;
If chance the radiant Sun with farewell sweet
Extend his ev’ning beam, the fields revive,
The birds thir notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest thir joy, that hill and valley rings.
O shame to men! Devil with Devil damn’d
Firm concord holds, men onely disagree

consider

relieve / beguile away

regions

forestalled
made bold
formerly

full of awe

pretending to worth
secret

threatening sky
landscape

Book 2

500

505

510

515

520

525

530

Of Creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly Grace: and God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife
Among themselves, and levie cruel warres,
Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy:
As if (which might induce us to accord)
Man had not hellish foes anow° besides,
That day and night for his destruction waite.
The Stygian Counsel thus dissolv’d; and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers,
Midst came thir mighty Paramount,° and seemd
Alone th’ Antagonist of Heav’n, nor less
Than Hells dread Emperour with pomp Supream,
And God-like imitated State; him round
A Globe of fierie Seraphim inclos’d
With bright imblazonrie,° and horrent° Arms.
Then of thir Session ended they bid cry
With Trumpets regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to thir mouths the sounding Alchymie
By Haralds voice explain’d: the hollow Abyss
Heard farr and wide, and all the host of Hell
With deafning shout, return’d them loud acclaim.
Thence more at ease thir minds and somwhat rais’d
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged° powers
Disband, and wandring, each his several way
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice
Leads him perplext, where he may likeliest find
Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain°
The irksom hours, till his great Chief return.
Part on the Plain, or in the Air sublime°
Upon the wing, or in swift Race contend,
As at th’ Olympian Games or Pythian fields;
Part curb thir fierie Steeds, or shun the Goal
With rapid wheels, or fronted Brigads° form.

51

enough

supreme ruler

heraldic devices / bristling

arrayed in ranks

while away
aloft

opposing teams

506 Stygian. From the river Styx, leading to Hades.
512 Globe. A compact body, often a formation of soldiers. “Seraphim” are associated with fire; saraph in
Hebrew means “to burn.”
517 sounding Alchymie. Trumpets made of the goldlike alloy, brass.
528–55. Athletic games and musical contests are common in epic. See Aeneid 6.642 – 59.
530. The “Olympian” games were held at Olympia, the “Pythian” games at Delphi.
531 shun the Goal. To drive a chariot as close as possible to a turning post without hitting it.

52

535

540

545

550

555

560
 
As when to warn proud Cities warr appears
Wag’d in the troubl’d Skie, and Armies rush
To Battel in the Clouds, before each Van°
Prick° forth the Aerie Knights, and couch thir Spears
Till thickest Legions close; with feats of Arms
From either end of Heav’n the welkin° burns.
Others with vast Typhœan rage more fell°
Rend up both Rocks and Hills, and ride the Air
In whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wilde uproar.
As when Alcides from Oechalia Crown’d
With conquest, felt th’ envenom’d robe, and tore
Through pain up by the roots Thessalian Pines,
And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw
Into th’ Euboic Sea. Others more milde,
Retreated in a silent valley, sing
With notes Angelical to many a Harp
Thir own Heroic deeds and hapless fall
By doom of Battel; and complain that Fate
Free Vertue should enthrall to Force or Chance.
Thir Song was partial,° but the harmony
(What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?)
Suspended° Hell, and took with ravishment
The thronging audience. In discourse more sweet
(For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense,)
Others apart sat on a Hill retir’d,
In thoughts more elevate, and reason’d high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will and Fate,
Fixt Fate, free will, foreknowledg absolute,
And found no end, in wandring mazes lost.
Of good and evil much they argu’d then,

vanguard
spur
sky
fierce

biased, polyphonic
held in suspense

533–6. The seeming appearance of warfare in the skies, reported before several notable battles including the
English Civil War, was thought to warn of the wars to come.
539–41 Typhœan rage. Typhon’s name was associated with typhoon, and meant “whirlwind.” See note to
1.198–9.
542–6 Alcides. Hercules (Alcides), wearing a poisoned (“envenom’d”) robe given to him through a deception practiced on his wife after he returned from a victory at “Oechalia,” was driven mad with pain. Wrongly
suspecting his beloved companion “Lichas,” who innocently gave him the cloak, he threw him along with
uprooted trees from the top of Mount “Oeta” in Thessaly into “the Euboic Sea,” the strait between Thessaly
in northern Greece and the Isle of Euboia. Cf. Ovid, Metamorphoses 9.134 –229.
557–65 Various classical schools are prefigured here, e.g. the Peripatetic, Epicurean, and Stoic, as well as contemporary theological debates about predestination, foreknowledge, and free will. Cf. Jesus’ denunciation
of the classical schools in Paradise Regained 4.291–321.

Book 2

565

570

575

580

585

590

595

Of happiness and final misery,
Passion and Apathie, and glory and shame,
Vain wisdom all, and false Philosophie:
Yet with a pleasing sorcerie could charm
Pain for a while or anguish, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm th’ obdured° brest
With stubborn patience as with triple steel.
Another part in Squadrons and gross° Bands,
On bold adventure to discover wide
That dismal world, if any Clime perhaps
Might yield them easier habitation, bend
Four ways thir flying March, along the Banks
Of four infernal Rivers that disgorge
Into the burning Lake thir baleful° streams;
Abhorred Styx the flood of deadly hate,
Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep;
Cocytus, nam’d of lamentation loud
Heard on the ruful stream; fierce Phlegeton
Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.
Farr off from these a slow and silent stream,
Lethe the River of Oblivion roules
Her watrie Labyrinth, whereof who drinks,
Forthwith his former state and being forgets,
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.
Beyond this flood a frozen Continent
Lies dark and wilde, beat with perpetual storms
Of Whirlwind and dire Hail, which on firm land
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems
Of ancient pile; all else deep snow and ice,
A gulf profound° as that Serbonian Bog
Betwixt Damiata and Mount Casius old,
Where Armies whole have sunk: the parching Air
Burns frore,° and cold performs th’ effect of Fire.

53

hardened
large, dense

evil

deep

extremely cold

564 Apathie. The Stoic ideal of freedom from passion.
575–81 four infernal Rivers. These are traditional in the geography of Hell; the epithet describing each translates its Greek name.
583 Lethe. Defined here as the “River of Oblivion.” Cf. lines 74 above and 604 below.
590–1 gathers heap. In a heap, resembling the ruins of a massive old building, “ancient pile.”
592–4 Serbonian Bog. Lake Serbonis, famous for quicksands that sank armies and overwhelmed the defeated
monster Typhon, lies near the city of “Damiata” (Damietta) on the Egyptian coast near the mouth of the
Nile. “Mount Casius” lies between Egypt and Arabia.

54

600

605

610

615

620

625
 
Thither by harpy-footed Furies hail’d,°
At certain revolutions° all the damn’d
Are brought: and feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extreams, extreams by change more fierce,
From Beds of raging Fire to starve° in Ice
Thir soft Ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infixt,° and frozen round,
Periods of time, thence hurried back to fire.
They ferry over this Lethean Sound
Both to and fro, thir sorrow to augment,
And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach
The tempting stream, with one small drop to loose
In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe,
All in one moment, and so neer the brink;
But Fate withstands, and to oppose th’ attempt
Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards
The Ford, and of it self the water flies
All taste of living wight,° as once it fled
The lip of Tantalus. Thus roving on
In confus’d march forlorn, th’ adventrous Bands
With shuddring horror pale, and eyes agast
View’d first thir lamentable lot, and found
No rest: through many a dark and drearie Vaile
They pass’d, and many a Region dolorous,
O’er many a Frozen, many a fierie Alpe,°
Rocks, Caves, Lakes, Fens, Bogs, Dens, and shades of death,
A Universe of death, which God by curse
Created evil, for evil only good,
Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds,
Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious° things,
Abominable, inutterable, and worse
Than Fables yet have feign’d, or fear conceiv’d,
Gorgons and Hydras, and Chimeras dire.
Mean while the Adversary of God and Man,

hauled, dragged
recurring times

freeze
firmly planted

creature

high mountain

unnatural, abnormal

596 harpy-footed. With eagle-like talons. In Homer the Harpies (winged monsters with women’s faces) carry
souls off to the avenging Furies (Odyssey 20.61–78). Milton combines the Harpies and the Furies.
611 Medusa. One of the three Gorgons, women with snaky hair whose look turned men to stone.
614. In Homer’s hell “Tantalus” is tormented (tantalized) by being forced to stand in the middle of a lake whose
waters recede whenever he tries to slake his raging thirst (Odyssey 11.582–92).
628 Hydras. Venomous serpents with nine heads, each of which grew back when severed. Chimeras. Firebreathing monsters.
Gorgons. See note to line 611.
629 Adversary. The literal meaning of “Satan” (see 1 Pet. 5:8).

Book 2

55

630 Satan with thoughts inflam’d of highest design,

635

640

645

650

655

660

Puts on swift wings, and towards the Gates of Hell
Explores° his solitary flight; som times
He scours the right hand coast, som times the left,
Now shaves° with level wing the Deep, then soares
Up to the fiery Concave° touring° high.
As when farr off at Sea a Fleet descri’d
Hangs in the Clouds, by Æquinoctial° Winds
Close sailing from Bengala, or the Iles
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence Merchants bring
Thir spicie Drugs:° they on the Trading Flood
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape
Ply stemming° nightly toward the Pole. So seem’d
Farr off the flying Fiend: at last appeer
Hell bounds high reaching to the horrid Roof,
And thrice threefold the Gates; three folds were Brass,
Three Iron, three of Adamantine° Rock,
Impenetrable, impal’d° with circling fire,
Yet unconsum’d. Before the Gates there sat
On either side a formidable shape;
The one seem’d Woman to the waste, and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fould
Voluminous and vast, a Serpent arm’d
With mortal sting: about her middle round
A cry° of Hell Hounds never ceasing bark’d
With wide Cerberian mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous Peal: yet, when they list,° would creep,
If aught disturb’d thir noyse, into her woomb,
And kennel there, yet there still bark’d and howl’d,
Within unseen. Farr less abhorrd than these
Vex’d Scylla bathing in the Sea that parts

tries, tests
skims
vault / rising, towering
from the Equator

spices
steering

impregnably hard
fenced in

pack
wished

638 Close sailing. Sailing close to the wind.
Bengala. Bengal, in India
639 Ternate and Tidore. Two of the Spice Islands, in the Moluccas (Indonesia).
640–2 Trading Flood. The trade route for spice merchants on the Indian “Ethiopian” Ocean, sailing from
the Moluccas toward “the Cape” of Good Hope and the South “Pole.”
648–9. The two figures blocking Satan’s path allude to the monster Scylla and the giant whirlpool Charybdis,
who threaten sailors passing down the Straits of Messina between Italy and Sicily (Odyssey 12.229 – 59).
The identification of the two “shapes” comes at lines 760 and 787 below.
650–61. Sin is modeled on “Scylla,” a beautiful nymph whose lower parts were changed into a ring of barking dogs when Circe, out of jealousy, poured poison into the straits between “Calabria,” the southernmost
part of Italy, and Sicily (“Trinacrian shore”) where she was bathing (Ovid, Metamorphoses 14.40–74).
Another model is Spenser’s Errour (Faerie Queene 1.1.14 –15).
655 Cerberian. Like Cerberus, the many-headed watchdog of Hades.

56

665

670

675

680

685

690

695
 
Calabria from the hoarse Trinacrian shore:
Nor uglier follow the Night-Hag, when call’d
In secret, riding through the Air she comes
Lur’d with the smell of infant blood, to dance
With Lapland Witches, while the labouring Moon
Eclipses at thir charms.° The other shape,
If shape it might be call’d that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joynt, or limb,
Or substance might be call’d that shadow seem’d,
For each seem’d either; black it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful Dart; what seem’d his head
The likeness of a Kingly Crown had on.
Satan was now at hand, and from his seat
The Monster moving onward came as fast
With horrid strides, Hell trembled as he strode.
Th’ undaunted Fiend what this might be admir’d,°
Admir’d, not fear’d; God and his Son except,
Created thing naught valu’d he nor shun’d;
And with disdainful look thus first began.
Whence and what art thou, execrable shape,
That dar’st, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated Front° athwart my way
To yonder Gates? through them I mean to pass,
That be assured, without leave askt of thee:
Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,°
Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heav’n.
To whom the Goblin full of wrauth reply’d,
Art thou that Traitor Angel, art thou hee,
Who first broke peace in Heav’n and Faith, till then
Unbrok’n, and in proud rebellious Arms
Drew after him the third part of Heav’ns Sons
Conjur’d° against the highest, for which both Thou
And they outcast from God, are here condemn’d
To waste Eternal dayes in woe and pain?
And reck’n’st thou thy self with Spirits of Heav’n,

magic spells

wondered

misshapen face

experience

conspired

662–5 Night-Hag. Hecate, goddess of sorcery, whose approach is signaled by howling dogs, and who attends
orgies of witches in Lapland (famous for witchcraft), drawn by the blood of babies they have sacrificed.
666–73. The portrayal of Death as a shadowy, black, nebulous figure with dart and crown is traditional
(cf. Rev. 6:2).
692 third part. The number comes from Rev. 12:4. Cf. PL 1.632– 3 and 9.141– 2.

Book 2

700

705

710

715

720

725

Hell-doom’d, and breath’st defiance here and scorn
Where I reign King, and to enrage thee more,
Thy King and Lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings,
Least with a whip of Scorpions° I pursue
Thy lingring, or with one stroke of this Dart
Strange horror seise thee, and pangs unfelt before.
So spake the grieslie terror, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatning, grew tenfold
More dreadful and deform: on th’ other side
Incenst with indignation Satan stood
Unterrifi’d, and like a Comet burn’d,
That fires the length of Ophiucus huge
In th’ Artick Sky, and from his horrid° hair
Shakes Pestilence and Warr. Each at the Head
Level’d his deadly aime; thir fatall hands
No second stroke intend, and such a frown
Each cast at th’ other, as when two black Clouds
With Heav’ns Artillery° fraught, come rattling on
Over the Caspian, then stand front to front
Hov’ring a space, till Winds the signal blow
To join thir dark Encounter in mid air:
So frownd the mighty Combatants, that Hell
Grew darker at thir frown, so matcht they stood;
For never but once more was either like
To meet so great a foe: and now great deeds
Had been achiev’d, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the Snakie Sorceress that sat
Fast by Hell Gate, and kept the fatal Key,
Ris’n, and with hideous outcry rush’d between.
O Father, what intends thy hand, she cry’d,
Against thy only Son? What fury O Son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal Dart

57

studded whip

bristling

thunderbolts

709–11 Ophiucus. A vast northern constellation, the Serpent Bearer. Comets were thought to predict or even
cause disasters such as “Pestilence” and “Warr”; one that appeared in this constellation in 1618 was taken
as an augury of the Thirty Years War. Cf. Tasso’s comparison of Argantes to a comet that threatens death
“To mighty lords, to monarchs, and to kings” (Gerusalemme Liberata 7.52).
714–18. Boiardo (Orlando Innamorato 1.16.10) likens Orlando and Agrican’s encounter to a clash of thunderclouds. The “Caspian” was notorious for storms.
722 foe. The Son will destroy “him that had the power of death, that is, the devil” (Heb. 2:14). He will also
destroy “the last enemy . . . death” (1 Cor. 15:26).

58
 
730 Against thy Fathers head? and know’st for whom;

735

740

745

750

755

760

For him who sits above and laughs the while
At thee ordain’d his drudge, to execute
What e’re his wrath, which he calls Justice, bids,
His wrath which one day will destroy ye both.
She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest
Forbore, then these to her Satan return’d:
So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
Thou interposest, that my sudden hand
Prevented° spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends; till first I know of thee,
What thing thou art, thus double-form’d, and why
In this infernal Vaile first met thou call’st
Me Father, and that Fantasm call’st my Son?
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
Sight more detestable then him and thee.
T’ whom thus the Portress of Hell Gate reply’d;
Hast thou forgot me then, and do I seem
Now in thine eye so foul, once deemd so fair
In Heav’n, when at th’ Assembly, and in sight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combin’d
In bold conspiracy against Heav’ns King,
All on a sudden miserable pain
Surprisd thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzie swumm
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
Threw forth, till on the left side op’ning wide,
Likest to thee in shape and count’nance bright,
Then shining heav’nly fair, a Goddess arm’d
Out of thy head I sprung; amazement seis’d
All th’ Host of Heav’n; back they recoild affraid
At first, and call’d me Sin, and for a Sign
Portentous held me; but familiar grown,
I pleas’d, and with attractive graces won
The most averse, thee chiefly, who full oft

forestalled

752–8. In Greek myth, Athena sprang fully armed out of the head of Zeus, an allegory, according to some
theologians, of God’s generation of the Son. Sin, Death, and Satan in their various incestuous interrelations parody obscenely the relations between God and the Son, Adam and Eve (cf. 5.602–17, 8.457– 77).
The “left” is the sinister side.
760–87. The allegorical figures of Sin and Death are based on Jas. 1:15: “Then when lust hath conceived, it
bringeth forth sin, and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.” But the incest of Sin and Death is
Milton’s own conception.

Book 2

765

770

775

780

785

790

795

800

Thy self in me thy perfect image viewing
Becam’st enamour’d, and such joy thou took’st
With me in secret, that my womb conceiv’d
A growing burden. Mean while Warr arose,
And fields were fought in Heav’n; wherein remaind
(For what could else) to our Almighty Foe
Cleer Victory, to our part loss and rout
Through all the Empyrean: down they fell
Driv’n headlong from the Pitch° of Heaven, down
Into this Deep, and in the general fall
I also; at which time this powerful Key
Into my hand was giv’n, with charge to keep
These Gates for ever shut, which none can pass
Without my op’ning. Pensive here I sat
Alone, but long I sat not, till my womb
Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown
Prodigious° motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou seest
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way
Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain
Distorted, all my nether shape° thus grew
Transform’d: but he my inbred enemie
Forth issu’d, brandishing his fatal Dart
Made to destroy: I fled, and cry’d out Death;
Hell trembl’d at the hideous Name, and sigh’d
From all her Caves, and back resounded Death.
I fled, but he pursu’d (though more, it seems,
Inflam’d with lust then rage) and swifter far,
Mee overtook his mother all dismaid,
And in embraces forcible and foule
Ingendring with me, of that rape begot
These yelling Monsters that with ceasless cry
Surround me, as thou sawst, hourly conceiv’d
And hourly born, with sorrow infinite
To me, for when they list° into the womb
That bred them they return, and howle and gnaw
My Bowels, thir repast; then bursting forth
Afresh with conscious terrours vex me round,
That rest or intermission none I find.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits

764–6. Cf. 3.62–4, 167–70.

59

apex, summit

enormous, portentous

lower parts

wish

60

805

810

815

820

825

830

835

840

845
 
Grim Death my Son and foe, who sets them on,
And me his Parent would full soon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involvd; and knows that I
Should prove a bitter Morsel, and his bane,°
When ever that shall be; so Fate pronounc’d.
But thou O Father, I forewarn thee, shun
His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in those bright Arms,
Though temper’d heav’nly, for that mortal dint,°
Save he who reigns above, none can resist.
She finish’d, and the suttle Fiend his lore°
Soon learnd, now milder, and thus answerd smooth.
Dear Daughter, since thou claim’st me for thy Sire,
And my fair Son here showst me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in Heav’n, and joys
Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change
Befalln us unforeseen, unthought of, know
I come no enemie, but to set free
From out this dark and dismal house of pain,
Both him and thee, and all the heav’nly Host
Of Spirits that in our just pretenses° arm’d
Fell with us from on high: from them I go
This uncouth° errand sole, and one for all
My self expose, with lonely steps to tread
Th’ unfounded° deep, and through the void immense
To search with wandring quest a place foretold
Should be, and, by concurring signs, ere now
Created vast and round, a place of bliss
In the Pourlieues° of Heav’n, and therein plac’t
A race of upstart Creatures, to supply
Perhaps our vacant room, though more remov’d,
Least Heav’n surcharg’d° with potent multitude
Might hap to move new broiles: Be this or aught
Then this more secret now design’d, I haste
To know, and this once known, shall soon return,
And bring ye to the place where Thou and Death
Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen
Wing silently the buxom° Air, imbalm’d°
With odours; there ye shall be fed and fill’d
Immeasurably, all things shall be your prey.
He ceas’d, for both seem’d highly pleasd, and Death

poison

fatal stroke
lesson

claims
unknown, strange
bottomless

outskirts

overcrowded

yielding / made fragrant

Book 2

850

855

860

865

870

875

880

Grinnd horrible a gastly smile, to hear
His famine° should be fill’d, and blest his mawe°
Destin’d to that good hour: no less rejoyc’d
His mother bad, and thus bespake her Sire.
The key of this infernal Pit by due,
And by command of Heav’ns all-powerful King
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
These Adamantine° Gates; against all force
Death ready stands to interpose his dart,
Fearless to be o’rmatcht by living might.
But what ow I to his commands above
Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down
Into this gloom of Tartarus profound,
To sit in hateful Office here confin’d,
Inhabitant of Heav’n, and heav’nlie-born,
Here in perpetual agonie and pain,
With terrors and with clamors compasst round
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed:
Thou art my Father, thou my Author, thou
My being gav’st me; whom should I obey
But thee, whom follow? thou wilt bring me soon
To that new world of light and bliss, among
The Gods who live at ease, where I shall Reign
At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end.
Thus saying, from her side the fatal Key,
Sad instrument of all our woe, she took;
And towards the Gate rouling her bestial train,
Forthwith the huge Porcullis° high up drew,
Which but her self not all the Stygian powers°
Could once have mov’d; then in the key-hole turns
Th’ intricate wards, and every Bolt and Bar
Of massie Iron or sollid Rock with ease
Unfast’ns: on a sudden op’n flie
With impetuous recoile and jarring sound
Th’ infernal dores, and on thir hinges grate
Harsh Thunder, that the lowest bottom shook

61

ravenous hunger / stomach

impregnably hard

outer gate
armies of hell

864–70. Parodies the Nicene Creed, “Jesus Christ . . . who sitteth on the right hand of the Father, and . . .
of whose kingdom there shall be no end.” Cf. PL 3.62–3, 250 – 65.
873 bestial train. Her yelping offspring.
877 wards. The ridges inside a lock, corresponding to the incisions on the key.

62

885

890

895

900

905

910
 
Of Erebus. She op’nd, but to shut
Excel’d her power; the Gates wide op’n stood,
That with extended wings a Bannerd Host°
Under spread Ensigns° marching might pass through
With Horse and Chariots rankt in loose array;
So wide they stood, and like a Furnace mouth
Cast forth redounding° smoak and ruddy flame.
Before thir eyes in sudden view appear
The secrets of the hoarie° deep, a dark
Illimitable° Ocean without bound,
Without dimension, where length, breadth, & highth,
And time and place are lost; where eldest Night
And Chaos, Ancestors of Nature, hold
Eternal Anarchie, amidst the noise
Of endless Warrs, and by confusion stand.
For hot, cold, moist, and dry, four Champions fierce
Strive here for Maistrie, and to Battel bring
Thir embryon Atoms; they around the flag
Of each his Faction, in thir several Clanns,
Light-arm’d or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift or slow,
Swarm populous, unnumber’d as the Sands
Of Barca or Cyrene’s torrid soil,
Levied to side with warring Winds, and poise
Thir lighter wings. To whom these most adhere,
Hee rules a moment; Chaos Umpire sits,
And by decision more imbroiles the fray
By which he Reigns: next him high Arbiter
Chance governs all. Into this wilde Abyss,
The Womb of nature and perhaps her Grave,

army waving banners
flags, standards

billowing
ancient
without limit

883 Erebus. In Greek myth, the son of Chaos. The name means darkness, and is applied to the dark space
through which the dead pass into Hades.
891–6. As a cosmic place, Chaos is infinitely extended and without any order; it surrounds the created places,
hell, heaven, the universe and it contains the primal matter out of which God creates. In Christian Doctrine
1.7, Milton argues that creation is not out of nothing but from matter originally in and then separated
from God and therefore good (cf. PL 7.168–73). As mythological figures “Chaos” and “eldest Night” are
the most ancient gods (Hesiod, Theogony 123, and Orphic Hymns 3.1–2). Milton allegorizes Chaos as embodiment of and anti-ruler (Anarch) of that place, along with Night, his consort.
898–903. These subatomic qualities combine in nature to form the four elements fire, earth, water, and air,
but in Chaos they struggle endlessly and the atoms remain unformed, embryonic. Milton’s description
owes something to Ovid, Metamorphoses 1.5–20. Atomist philosophers (e.g. Lucretius, De Rerum Natura
Book 2) saw atoms as forming the universe through endless collisions, by chance.
904 Barca . . . Cyrene. Cities in the Libyan desert.
905 Levied. Enlisted as troops, also, raised up.
poise. Add weight to.

Book 2

915

920

925

930

935

940

945

Of neither Sea, nor Shore, nor Air, nor Fire,
But all these in thir pregnant causes mixt
Confus’dly, and which thus must ever fight,
Unless th’ Almighty Maker them ordain
His dark materials to create more Worlds,
Into this wild Abyss the warie fiend
Stood on the brink of Hell and look’d a while,
Pondering his Voyage: for no narrow frith°
He had to cross. Nor was his eare less peal’d°
With noises loud and ruinous° (to compare
Great things with small) then when Bellona storms,
With all her battering Engines bent to rase
Som Capital City; or less then if this frame°
Of Heav’n were falling, and these Elements
In mutinie had from her Axle torn
The stedfast Earth. At last his Sail-broad Vannes°
He spreads for flight, and in the surging smoak
Uplifted spurns the ground, thence many a League
As in a cloudy Chair ascending rides
Audacious, but that seat soon failing, meets
A vast vacuitie: all unawares
Fluttring his pennons° vain plumb down he drops
Ten thousand fadom deep, and to this hour
Down had been falling, had not by ill chance
The strong rebuff° of som tumultuous cloud
Instinct° with Fire and Nitre° hurried him
As many miles aloft: that furie stay’d,
Quencht in a Boggy Syrtis, neither Sea,
Nor good dry Land: nigh founderd° on he fares,
Treading the crude consistence, half on foot,
Half flying; behoves him now both Oare and Saile.
As when a Gryfon through the Wilderness
With winged course ore Hill or moarie° Dale
Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stelth
Had from his wakeful custody purloind
The guarded Gold: So eagerly the fiend

63

channel, firth
dinned
crashing

structure

wings

feathers (pinions)

counterblast
infused / satlpeter

sunk, drowned

marshy

921–2 to compare / Great things with small. A Virgilian formula (Eclogues 1.23; Georgics 4.176).
Bellona. Roman goddess of war.
939 Syrtis. The Syrtes were shifting sandbars and dangerous quicksands off the North African coast. Lucan
describes them (Pharsalia 9.303–4) as “ambiguous between sea and land.”
943–7 Gryfon. Griffins were fabulous creatures, half-eagle, half-lion, who guarded the gold of Scythia; it was
stolen from them by the one-eyed “Arimaspian” people (Herodotus, 3.116).

64

950

955

960

965

970

975

980
 
Ore bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,
And swims or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flyes:
At length a universal hubbub wilde
Of stunning° sounds and voices all confus’d
Born through the hollow dark assaults his eare
With loudest vehemence: thither he plyes,°
Undaunted to meet there what ever power
Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss
Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask
Which way the neerest coast of darkness lyes
Bordering on light; when strait° behold the Throne
Of Chaos, and his dark Pavilion spread
Wide on the wasteful° Deep; with him Enthron’d
Sat Sable-vested Night, eldest of things,
The Consort of his Reign; and by them stood
Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name
Of Demogorgon; Rumor next and Chance,
And Tumult and Confusion all imbroild,
And Discord with a thousand various mouths.
T’ whom Satan turning boldly, thus. Ye Powers
And Spirits of this nethermost Abyss,
Chaos and ancient Night, I come no Spy,
With purpose to explore or to disturb
The secrets of your Realm, but by constraint
Wandring this darksome Desart, as my way
Lies through your spacious Empire up to light,
Alone, and without guide, half lost, I seek
What readiest path leads where your gloomie bounds
Confine° with Heav’n; or if som other place
From your Dominion won, th’ Ethereal King
Possesses lately, thither to arrive
I travel this profound,° direct my course;
Directed no mean recompence it brings
To your behoof,° if I that Region lost,
All usurpation thence expell’d, reduce
To her original darkness and your sway

deafening
makes his way

at once
desolate

border on

deep abyss
on your behalf

960–7. Chaos’s court of personifications resembles the halls of Pluto in Aeneid 6.273 – 81.
964. Latin “Orcus” and Greek “Ades” (Hades) are names of Pluto, ruler of the underworld.
965 Demogorgon. Often taken to be the most ancient and terrible of the gods, associated with Night. In Bocaccio’s
De Genealogiis Deorum he is the parent of Night and the other dark gods, Erebus, Tumult, Discord, etc.

Book 2

65

985 (Which is my present journey) and once more

990

995

1000

1005

1010

1015

1020

Erect the Standard there of ancient Night;
Yours be th’ advantage all, mine the revenge.
Thus Satan; and him thus the Anarch old
With faultring speech and visage incompos’d°
Answer’d. I know thee, stranger, who thou art,
That mighty leading Angel, who of late
Made head° against Heav’ns King, though overthrown.
I saw and heard, for such a numerous Host
Fled not in silence through the frighted deep
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,
Confusion worse confounded; and Heav’n Gates
Pourd out by millions her victorious Bands
Pursuing. I upon my Frontieres here
Keep residence; if all I can will serve,
That little which is left so to defend,
Encroacht on still° through [y]our intestine broiles°
Weakning the Scepter of old Night: first Hell
Your dungeon stretching far and wide beneath;
Now lately Heaven° and Earth, another World
Hung ore my Realm, link’d in a golden Chain
To that side Heav’n° from whence your Legions fell:
If that way be your walk, you have not farr;
So much the neerer danger; go and speed;
Havock and spoil and ruin are my gain.
He ceas’d; and Satan staid not to reply,
But glad that now his Sea should find a shore,
With fresh alacritie and force renew’d
Springs upward like a Pyramid of fire
Into the wilde expanse, and through the shock
Of fighting Elements, on all sides round
Environ’d wins his way; harder beset
And more endanger’d, then when Argo pass’d
Through Bosporus betwixt the justling Rocks:
Or when Ulysses on the Larbord° shunnd
Charybdis, and by th’ other whirlpool steard.
So he with difficulty and labour hard

disordered

rose up

constantly / civil wars

the sky
the empyrean

port side

1017–18. Jason and his companions sailed in the “Argo” through the “Bosporus” to the Black Sea, passing between
the Symplegades, or “justling Rocks.”
1019–20. Homer’s Odysseus (“Ulysses”) sailing through the Straits of Messina between Italy and Sicily avoids
the whirlpool of “Charybdis” and steers by the “other” monster, Scylla (not a whirlpool in Homer) who
devours six of his men (Odyssey 12.55–126, 222–59).

66

1025

1030

1035

1040

1045

1050

1055
 
Mov’d on, with difficulty and labour hee;
But hee once past, soon after when man fell,
Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain°
Following his track, such was the will of Heav’n,
Pav’d after him a broad and beat’n way
Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling Gulf
Tamely endur’d a Bridge of wondrous length
From Hell continu’d reaching th’ utmost Orbe°
Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse
With easie intercourse pass to and fro
To tempt or punish mortals, except whom
God and good Angels guard by special grace.
But now at last the sacred influence
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heav’n
Shoots farr into the bosom of dim Night
A glimmering dawn; here Nature first begins
Her fardest verge,° and Chaos to retire
As from her outmost works a brok’n foe
With tumult less and with less hostile din,
That Satan with less toil, and now with ease
Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious° light
And like a weather-beaten Vessel holds°
Gladly the Port, though Shrouds° and Tackle° torn;
Or in the emptier waste, resembling Air,
Weighs° his spread wings, at leasure to behold
Farr off th’ Empyreal Heav’n, extended wide
In circuit, undetermind square or round,
With Opal Towrs and Battlements adorn’d
Of living Saphire, once his native Seat;
And fast by hanging in a golden Chain
This pendant world,° in bigness as a Starr
Of smallest Magnitude close by the Moon.
Thither full fraught° with mischievous revenge,
Accurst, and in a cursed hour he hies.°

at full speed

outermost sphere

extreme boundary

wavering
makes for
sails / rigging
holds steady

universe
freighted
hastens

The End of the Second Book.

1024–32. See 10.293–305.
1050 living Saphire. Cf. Rev. 21:19.
1051. The “golden Chain” was commonly interpreted as a symbol of universal concord and divine design.
The figure appears in Iliad 8.18–27, Plato’s Theaetetus (153c–d), Spenser’s Faerie Queene 2.7.46, and in Milton’s
“Prolusion 2.”

BOOK 3
THE ARGUMENT

5

10

15

20

God sitting on his Throne sees Satan flying towards this world, then newly created;
shews him to the Son who sat at his right hand; foretells the success of Satan in perverting mankind; clears his own Justice and Wisdom from all imputation, having
created Man free and able enough to have withstood his Tempter; yet declares his
purpose of grace towards him, in regard he fell not of his own malice, as did Satan,
but by him seduc’t. The Son of God renders praises to his Father for the manifestation of his gracious purpose towards Man; but God again declares, that Grace cannot be extended towards Man without the satisfaction of divine Justice; Man hath
offended the majesty of God by aspiring to God-head, and therefore with all his Progeny
devoted to death must dye, unless some one can be found sufficient to answer for
his offence, and undergo his Punishment. The Son of God freely offers himself a
Ransome for Man: the Father accepts him, ordains his incarnation, pronounces his
exaltation above all Names in Heaven and Earth; commands all the Angels to adore
him; they obey, and hymning to thir Harps in full Quire, celebrate the Father and
the Son. Mean while Satan alights upon the bare Convex of this Worlds outermost
Orb; where wandring he first finds a place since call’d The Lymbo of Vanity; what
persons and things fly up thither; thence comes to the Gate of Heaven, describ’d
ascending by staires, and the waters above the Firmament that flow about it:
His passage thence to the Orb of the Sun; he finds there Uriel the Regient of that
Orb, but first changes himself into the shape of a meaner Angel; and pretending
a zealous desire to behold the new Creation and Man whom God had plac’t here,
inquires of him the place of his habitation, and is directed; alights first on Mount
Niphates.

Hail holy Light, offspring of Heav’n first-born,
Or of th’ Eternal Coeternal beam
May I express thee unblam’d? Since God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
5 Dwelt from Eternitie, dwelt then in thee,
Bright effluence° of bright essence increate.°

radiance / uncreated, eternal

16 Lymbo of Vanity. In Ariosto, Orlando Furioso 34., stanzas 72 – 87, the Knight Astolfo flies to the Limbo
of Vanity in the moon, to recover Orlando’s lost wits. Milton refers to that Limbo as the recent name
(“since call’d”) of the Paradise of Fools that Satan visits.
1–55. This second Proem or invocation is a hymn to Light, addressed either as the first creature of God
(“first-born,” cf. 7.243–4, where light is termed the “first of things,” and Gen.1:3) or as coeternal with God,
with allusion to 1 John 1:5, “God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all.”
4 unapproached. Cf. 1 Tim. 6:16: God dwells “in the light which no man can approach unto.”

68

10

15

20

25

30
 
Or hear’st thou rather pure Ethereal stream,
Whose Fountain who shall tell? before the Sun,
Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice
Of God, as with a Mantle didst invest°
The rising world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formless infinite.
Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing,
Escap’t the Stygian Pool, though long detain’d
In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight
Though utter and through middle darkness borne
With other notes then to th’ Orphean Lyre
I sing of Chaos and Eternal Night,
Taught by the heav’nly Muse to venture down
The dark descent, and up to reascend,
Though hard and rare: thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy sovran vital Lamp; but thou
Revisit’st not these eyes, that rowle in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;
So thick a drop serene hath quencht thir Orbs,
Or dim suffusion veild. Yet not the more
Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt
Cleer Spring, or shadie Grove, or Sunnie Hill,
Smit with the love of sacred Song; but chief
Thee Sion and the flowrie Brooks beneath
That wash thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I visit: nor somtimes forget

cover

7 hear’st thou rather. Would you rather be called (a Latinism).
Ethereal. consisting of ether, the fifth,
purest element.
11. Echoes Spenser, Faerie Queene 1.1.39, “the world of waters wide and deepe.”
12. Cf. 7.210–12, 233–4.
14 Stygian Pool. The river Styx, in the classical Hades.
17 Orphean Lyre. Orpheus, the Greek poet whose song could charm even trees and rocks, visited the underworld to win back his wife, Eurydice; one of the poems attributed to him is the so-called Orphic hymn
“To Night.” Milton’s song, Christian and epic, is of another kind, “other notes.”
19 heav’nly Muse. Urania, invoked at 1.6–16 but not named until 7.1. See note to that line.
20–1. Echoes the Sibyl’s warning to Aeneas (Aeneid 6.126– 9).
25–6. Medical terms of Milton’s day for diseases of the eyes, one of which he thinks may have caused his
blindness: “drop serene” translates gutta serena, a form of blindness in which the vision is “quencht” but
the eyes retain their clear appearance (as Milton’s did); “dim suffusion” translates suffusio nigra, a disease
in which the vision is “veild” as with cataracts.
30 Sion. The mountain of scriptural inspiration, with its “flowrie Brooks” Siloa and Kidron (in contrast with
Mount Parnassus and its stream, Helicon).
32. Milton composed chiefly at night.

Book 3

35

40

45

50

55

60

Those other two equal’d with me in Fate,
So were I equal’d with them in renown,
Blind Thamyris and blind Mæonides,
And Tiresias and Phineus Prophets old.
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntarie move
Harmonious numbers;° as the wakeful Bird°
Sings darkling,° and in shadiest Covert hid
Tunes her nocturnal Note. Thus with the Year
Seasons return, but not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of Ev’n or Morn,
Or sight of vernal° bloom, or Summers Rose,
Or flocks, or heards, or human face divine;
But cloud in stead, and ever-during dark
Surrounds me, from the chearful wayes of men
Cut off, and for the Book of knowledg° fair
Presented with a Universal blanc
Of Natures works to mee expung’d and ras’d,°
And wisdome at one entrance quite shut out.
So much the rather thou Celestial light
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate, there plant eyes, all mist from thence
Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell
Of things invisible to mortal sight.
Now had the Almighty Father from above,
From the pure Empyrean° where he sits
High Thron’d above all highth, bent down his eye,
His own works and their works at once to view:
About him all the Sanctities° of Heaven
Stood thick as Starrs, and from his sight receiv’d
Beatitude past utterance; on his right
The radiant image of his Glory sat,
His onely Son; On Earth he first beheld

69

verses / the nightingale
in the dark

spring

Book of Nature
erased

highest heaven

angels

35 Thamyris. A legendary Thracian poet who was punished with blindness for boasting he could sing better
than the Muses (Iliad 2.594–600).
Mæonides. Homer, said to be the son of Mæon, was often
referred to by this patronymic.
36 Tiresias. A blind Theban seer who foretold many events in the mythical history of Thebes; he also revealed
Oedipus’ guilt to him.
Phineus. Thracian king said to have been blinded by the gods for revealing
their counsels, but in the Second Defence Milton denies that his blindness was a punishment. In both, blindness and prophecy are linked.
37 voluntarie. Freely, as in a musical voluntary, added at will by the performer.
61–2. The sight of God is said to be the supreme joy of heaven, the greatest “Beatitude” (see Christian
Doctrine 1.33).
63. Cf. Heb. 1:3: “the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person.”

70
 
65 Our two first Parents, yet the onely two

70

75

80

85

90

95

Of mankind, in the happie Garden plac’t,
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivald love
In blissful solitude; he then survey’d
Hell and the Gulf between, and Satan there
Coasting° the wall of Heav’n on this side Night
In the dun° Air sublime,° and ready now
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet
On the bare outside of this World,° that seem’d
Firm land imbosom’d without Firmament,
Uncertain which, in Ocean or in Air.
Him God beholding from his prospect° high,
Wherein past, present, future he beholds,
Thus to his onely Son foreseing spake.
Only begotten Son, seest thou what rage
Transports our adversarie, whom no bounds
Prescrib’d, no bars of Hell, nor all the chains
Heapt on him there, nor yet the main° Abyss
Wide interrupt can hold; so bent he seems
On desparate reveng, that shall redound
Upon his own rebellious head. And now
Through all restraint broke loose he wings his way
Not farr off Heav’n, in the Precincts° of light,
Directly towards the new created World,
And Man there plac’t, with purpose to assay°
If him by force he can destroy, or worse,
By some false guile pervert; and shall pervert
For man will hark’n to his glozing° lyes,
And easily transgress the sole Command,
Sole pledge of his obedience: So will fall,
Hee and his faithless Progenie: whose fault?

skirting
dusky / aloft
the universe

lookout point

vast

environs
test

flattering

73 stoop. Descend swiftly (a term from hawking).
75 without Firmament. On the outside of the firmament (the sphere of the fixed stars that encloses the universe); also, without the shelter of any firmament.
76 Uncertain. It is not clear whether the universe floats in water or in air.
81 Transports. Conveys, moves passionately.
adversarie. The literal meaning of Satan.
84 Wide interrupt. Chaos, that forms a wide “Abyss” or gulf between Heaven and Hell; “interrupt” keeps
its Latin meaning, broken open.
94 sole Command. Not to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. See Gen. 3:3, “Ye shall not eat
of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.”
96 faithless Progenie. Adam passes on to his descendants his original sin and its consequence, absence of
saving faith in God.

Book 3

100

105

110

115

120

125

71

Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of mee
All he could have; I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all th’ Ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood and them who faild;
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have givn sincere
Of true allegiance, constant Faith or Love,
Where onely what they needs must do, appeard,
Not what they would? what praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When Will and Reason (Reason also is choice)
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild,
Made passive both, had servd necessitie,
Not mee. They therefore as to right belongd,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Thir maker, or thir making, or thir Fate,
As if predestination over-ruld
Thir will, dispos’d by absolute Decree
Of high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I; if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less prov’d certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of Fate,
Or aught by me immutablie foreseen,
They trespass, Authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge and what they choose; for so
I formd them free, and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves; I else must change
Thir nature, and revoke the high Decree
Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordain’d
Thir freedom, they themselves ordain’d thir fall.

97–102. Milton insists that God created Adam and Eve and the angels with “sufficient” power and with reason and free will to resist evil. “The matter or object of the divine plan was that angels and men alike
should be endowed with free will, so that they could either fall or not fall” (Christian Doctrine 1.3).
108–9 Reason also is choice. For example, reason is meaningless unless it can eventuate in choices which
are free. Cf. Areopagitica, “When God gave him reason he gave him freedom to choose, for reason is but
choosing.”
111–19. Summarizes Milton’s argument in Christian Doctrine 1.3 – 4, that God does not predestine any to sin
or damnation and that his perfect foreknowledge of events does not amount to predestination; rather, he
foresees because he knows past, present, and future at once. God knows what will happen (even as humans
know what is happening or has happened) but does not cause the actions of humans or angels.

72

130

135

140

145

150

155

160
 
The first sort° by thir own suggestion fell,
Self-tempted, self-deprav’d: Man falls deceiv’d
By the other first: Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none: in Mercy and Justice both,
Through Heav’n and Earth, so shall my glorie excel,
But Mercy first and last shall brightest shine.
Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance fill’d
All Heav’n, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable° diffus’d:
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious, in him all his Father shon
Substantially express’d, and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appeerd,
Love without end, and without measure Grace,
Which uttering thus he to his Father spake.
O Father, gracious was that word which clos’d
Thy sovran sentence, that Man should find grace,
For which both Heav’n and Earth shall high extoll
Thy praises, with th’ innumerable sound
Of Hymns and sacred Songs, wherewith thy Throne
Encompass’d shall resound thee ever blest.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man
Thy creature late so lov’d, thy youngest Son
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joynd
With his own folly? that be from thee farr,
That farr be from thee, Father, who art Judg
Of all things made, and judgest onely right.
Or shall the Adversarie thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine, shall he fulfill
His malice, and thy goodness bring to naught,
Or proud return though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplish’t and to Hell
Draw after him the whole Race of mankind,
By him corrupted? or wilt thou thy self

fallen angels

inexpressible

136 Spirits elect. The unfallen angels. In Christian Doctrine 1.9 Milton insists that the angels “stand by their
own strength” and are called “elect” (1 Tim. 5:21) only in the sense that they are “beloved, or excellent.”
Cf. PL 5.535–7.
140. In Christian Doctrine 1.5 Milton argues that God imparted to his Son his divine substance but not his
“whole essence,” as no two beings can have the same essence.
150–5. The Son echoes, or rather foreshadows, another mediator, Abraham, in his pleas to the Lord to spare
Sodom, “That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked . . . that be
far from thee. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?” (Gen. 18:25).

Book 3

165

170

175

180

185

190

Abolish thy Creation, and unmake,
For him, what for thy glorie thou hast made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be questiond and blaspheam’d° without defence.
To whom the great Creatour thus reply’d.
O Son, in whom my Soul hath chief delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
All hast thou spok’n as my thoughts are, all
As my Eternal purpose hath decreed:
Man shall not quite be lost, but sav’d who will,
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely voutsaft;° once more I will renew
His lapsed° powers, though forfeit and enthrall’d
By sin to foul exorbitant desires;
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal° foe,
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fall’n condition is, and to me ow
All his deliv’rance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar° grace
Elect above the rest; so is my will:
The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warnd
Thir sinful state, and to appease betimes°
Th’ incensed Deitie, while offerd grace
Invites; for I will cleer thir senses dark,
What may suffice, and soft’n stonie hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To Prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endevord with sincere intent,
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.

73

defamed

granted
decayed

death-dealing

special

in time

170–2. The Son is the agent through whom God’s power, “effectual might,” is exercised (cf. l Cor. 1:24), the
“word” through whom his “wisdom” is made manifest and his creative will is performed ( John 1:1–3).
See PL 6.710–14 and 7.163–6.
174–80. After the Fall salvation is only possible through God’s grace. Reason and will are so damaged that
unless God renews them humans cannot resist sin or respond to the grace offered.
183–90. Milton’s God rejects the Calvinist doctrine that he had from the beginning predestined the damnation or salvation of each soul; rather, he associates himself with the Arminian doctrine that grace sufficient
for salvation is offered to all, enabling each person, if he or she so chooses, to believe and persevere. He does,
however, assert the right to give special grace to some, “elect above the rest.” See Christian Doctrine 1.4.
189 stonie hearts. Cf. Ezek. 11:19. “I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart
of flesh.” See PL 11.1–5.

74

195

200

205

210

215

220

225
 
And I will place within them as a guide
My Umpire Conscience, whom if they will hear,
Light after light well us’d they shall attain,
And to the end persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance and my day of grace
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste;
But hard be hard’nd, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall;
And none but such from mercy I exclude.
But yet all is not don; Man disobeying,
Disloyal breaks his fealtie, and sinns
Against the high Supremacie of Heav’n,
Affecting° God-head, and so loosing all,
To expiate his Treason hath naught left,
But to destruction sacred° and devote,°
He with his whole posteritie must dye,
Dye hee or Justice must; unless for him
Som other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
Say Heav’nly powers, where shall we find such love,
Which of ye will be mortal° to redeem
Mans mortal crime, and just th’ unjust to save,
Dwels in all Heaven charitie so deare?
He ask’d, but all the Heav’nly Quire stood mute,
And silence was in Heav’n: on mans behalf
Patron° or Intercessor none appeerd,
Much less that durst upon his own head draw
The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set.
And now without redemption all mankind
Must have bin lost, adjudg’d to Death and Hell
By doom severe, had not the Son of God,
In whom the fulness dwels of love divine,
His dearest mediation° thus renewd.
Father, thy word is past, man shall find grace;
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,

aspiring to
set apart / consecrated

human, subject to death

advocate

intercession

200. By at long last withdrawing his offered grace God leaves such obdurate sinners to themselves, to become
more and more hardened and blinded. See Christian Doctrine 1.8.
212 rigid satisfaction. Here and in Christian Doctrine 1.16 Milton’s God paraphrases the Anselmic theory of
the Atonement: “Satisfaction means that Christ . . . fully satisfied divine justice by fulfilling the Law and
paying the just price on behalf of all men.”
213–19. Cf. the devils in the Great Consult (2.402–26).
charitie. Heavenly love, disinterested and altruistic (Latin caritas).

Book 3

230

235

240

245

250

255

260

The speediest of thy winged messengers,
To visit all thy creatures, and to all
Comes unprevented,° unimplor’d unsought,
Happie° for man, so coming; he her aid°
Can never seek, once dead in sins and lost;
Atonement for himself or offering meet,°
Indebted and undon, hath none to bring:
Behold mee then, mee for him, life for life
I offer, on mee let thine anger fall;
Account mee man; I for his sake will leave
Thy bosom, and this glorie next to thee
Freely put off, and for him lastly dye
Well pleas’d, on me let Death wreck all his rage;
Under his gloomie power I shall not long
Lie vanquisht, thou hast givn me to possess
Life in my self for ever, by thee I live,
Though now to Death I yield, and am his due
All that of me can die, yet that debt paid,
Thou wilt not leave me in the loathsom grave
His prey, nor suffer my unspotted Soule
For ever with corruption there to dwell;
But I shall rise Victorious, and subdue
My vanquisher, spoild of his vanted spoile;
Death his deaths wound shall then receive, and stoop
Inglorious, of his mortall sting disarm’d.
I through the ample Air in Triumph high
Shall lead Hell Captive maugre° Hell, and show
The powers of darkness bound. Thou at the sight
Pleas’d, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile,
While by thee rais’d I ruin all my Foes,
Death last, and with his Carcass glut the Grave:
Then with the multitude of my redeemd
Shall enter Heaven long absent, and returne,

75

prior, unanticipated
fortunate / grace
fitting, adequate

in spite of

236–7. Echoes Nisus’ offer to save the life of his friend Euryalus, Aeneid 9.427–8: “Me, me adsum, qui feci,
in me convertite ferrum, O Rutuli! mea fraus omnis.”
243–4. Cf. John 5:26: “For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in
himself.”
247–9. Cf. Ps. 16:10: “Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see
corruption.”
253 mortall sting. Cf. 1 Cor. 15:55–6: “O death, where is thy sting? . . . The sting of death is sin.”
258 ruin. Throw down (the Latin sense).
259. Cf. 1 Cor. 15:26: “The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.”

76

265

270

275

280

285

290

295
 
Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud
Of anger shall remain, but peace assur’d,
And reconcilement; wrauth shall be no more
Thenceforth, but in thy presence Joy entire.
His words here ended, but his meek aspect
Silent yet spake, and breath’d immortal love
To mortal men, above which only shon
Filial obedience: as a sacrifice
Glad to be offer’d, he attends the will
Of his great Father. Admiration° seis’d
All Heav’n, what this might mean, and whither tend
Wondring, but soon th’ Almighty thus reply’d:
O thou in Heav’n and Earth the only peace
Found out for mankind under wrauth, O thou
My sole complacence!° well thou know’st how dear,
To me are all my works, nor Man the least
Though last created, that for him I spare
Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,
By loosing thee a while, the whole Race lost.
Thou therefore whom° thou only canst redeem,
Thir Nature also to thy Nature joyn;
And be thy self Man among men on Earth,
Made flesh, when time shall be, of Virgin seed,
By wondrous birth: Be thou in Adams room
The Head of all mankind, though Adams Son.
As in him perish all men, so in thee
As from a second root shall be restor’d,
As many as are restor’d, without thee none.
His crime makes guiltie all his Sons, thy merit
Imputed shall absolve them who renounce
Thir own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,
And live in thee transplanted, and from thee
Receive new life. So Man, as is most just,
Shall satisfie for Man, be judg’d and die,
And dying rise, and rising with him raise

wonder

pleasure, satisfaction

those whom

286 Head of all mankind. Cf. 1 Cor. 11:3: “The head of every man is Christ.”
288–9. Cf. 1 Cor. 15:22: “For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.”
290–4. Summarizes the reformed doctrine of justification by faith. The merit of Christ attributed vicariously
(“imputed”) to humans frees from original sin those who renounce their own deeds, both good and bad,
and hope to be saved through faith.
293 transplanted. Cf. Christian Doctrine 1.21, “Of Ingrafting in Christ”: “God the Father plants believers in
Christ. That is to say, he makes them sharers in Christ.” The first effect is “new life and growth.”

Book 3

300

305

310

315

320

325

His Brethren, ransomed with his own dear life.
So Heav’nly love shall outdoo Hellish hate
Giving° to death, and dying, to redeeme,
So dearly to redeem what Hellish hate
So easily destroy’d, and still destroyes
In those who, when they may, accept not grace.
Nor shalt thou by descending to assume
Mans Nature, less’n or degrade thine owne.
Because thou hast, though Thron’d in highest bliss
Equal to God, and equally enjoying
God-like fruition,° quitted all to save
A World from utter loss, and hast been found
By Merit more then Birthright Son of God,
Found worthiest to be so by being Good,
Farr more then Great or High; because in thee
Love hath abounded more then Glory abounds,
Therefore thy Humiliation shall exalt
With thee thy Manhood also to this Throne;
Here shalt thou sit Incarnate, here shalt Reign
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,
Anointed universal King; all Power
I give thee, reign for ever, and assume
Thy Merits;° under thee as Head Supream
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions I reduce:
All knees to thee shall bow; of them that bide
In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell;
When thou attended gloriously from Heav’n
Shalt in the sky appeer, and from thee send
The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaime
Thy dread Tribunal: forthwith from all Windes°
The living, and forthwith the cited° dead
Of all past Ages to the general Doom
Shall hast’n, such a peal shall rouse thir sleep.

77

submitting

pleasurable possession

rewards

directions
summoned

297 ransomed. Cf. Matt. 20:28, “The Son of man came . . . to give his life a ransom for many.”
309. A heterodox doctrine, that the Son was Son of God by merit. In Ovid, Metamorphoses 2.42 –3 (George
Sandys’ translation), Apollo says to his son, Phaeton, “by merit, as by birth, to thee is due that name.”
Cf. PL 2.5.
320. Orders of angels.
321–2. Cf. Phil. 2:10: “At the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth,
and things under the earth.”
323–32. The description of the Last Judgment draws on several biblical texts, among them Matt. 24:30 –1
and 25:31–2, 1 Cor. 15:51–2, and 1 Thess. 4:17.

78
 
330 Then all thy Saints assembl’d, thou shalt judge

335

340

345

350

355

360

Bad men and Angels, they arraignd° shall sink
Beneath thy Sentence; Hell her numbers full,
Thenceforth shall be fore ever shut. Mean while
The World shall burn, and from her ashes spring
New Heav’n and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell,
And after all thir tribulations long
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,
With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth.
Then thou thy regal Scepter shalt lay by,
For regal Scepter then no more shall need,
God shall be All in All. But all ye Gods,°
Adore him, who to compass all this dies,
Adore the Son, and honour him as mee
No sooner had th’ Almighty ceas’t, but all
The multitude of Angels with a shout
Loud as from numbers without number, sweet
As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heav’n rung
With Jubilee, and loud Hosanna’s filld
Th’eternal Regions: lowly reverent
Towards either Throne they bow, and to the ground
With solemn adoration down they cast
Thir Crowns inwove with Amarant and Gold,
Immortal Amarant, a Flour which once
In Paradise, fast by° the Tree of Life
Began to bloom, but soon for mans offence
To Heav’n remov’d where first it grew, there grows,
And flours aloft shading the Fount of Life,
And where the river of Bliss through midst of Heavn
Rowls o’re Elisian Flours her Amber° stream;
With these° that never fade the Spirits elect
Bind thir resplendent locks inwreath’d with beams,
Now in loose Garlands thick thrown off, the bright
Pavement that like a Sea of Jasper shon

accursed

angels

close by

pure, clear
amaranth flowers

334–5. For the fiery destruction and new heavens and earth, see 2 Pet. 3:12–13, and Rev. 21:1.
340–1. Cf. 1 Cor. 15:28: “And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be
subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.”
351 Amarant. In Greek, unfading, a legendary immortal flower.
350–71. Milton’s heaven draws upon imagery from Rev. 4 and 22:1– 2 (thrones, harps, golden crowns, sea
of jasper, angelic hymns, pure river, tree of life); other details, e.g. the “Elisian” flowers, recall classical
descriptions of the Elysian Fields.

Book 3

365

370

375

380

385

390

Impurpl’d with Celestial Roses smil’d.
Then Crown’d again thir gold’n Harps they took,
Harps ever tun’d, that glittering by thir side
Like Quivers hung, and with Præamble° sweet
Of charming symphonie they introduce
Thir sacred Song, and waken raptures high;
No voice exempt,° no voice but well could joine
Melodious part, such concord is in Heav’n.
Thee Father first they sung Omnipotent,
Immutable, Immortal, Infinite,
Eternal King; thee Author of all being,
Fountain of Light, thy self invisible
Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sit’st
Thron’d inaccessible, but° when thou shad’st
The full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud
Drawn round about thee like a radiant Shrine,
Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appeer,
Yet dazle Heav’n, that brightest Seraphim
Approach not, but with both wings veil thir eyes.
Thee next they sang of all Creation first,
Begotten Son, Divine Similitude,
In whose conspicuous count’nance, without cloud
Made visible, th’ Almighty Father shines,
Whom else no Creature can behold; on thee
Impresst the effulgence° of his Glorie abides,
Transfus’d on thee his ample Spirit rests.
Hee Heav’n of Heavens and all the Powers therein
By thee created, and by thee threw down
Th’ aspiring Dominations: thou that day
Thy Fathers dreadful Thunder didst not spare,
Nor stop thy flaming Chariot wheels, that shook

79

musical prelude

excluded

except

radiance

373. This line is a direct quote from Joshua Sylvester’s Divine Weeks and Works (1605) 1.1.45, a translation of
Du Bartas’ La Semaine (1578).
381–2. Cf. Isa. 6:2, describing the seraphim around God’s throne, “each one had six wings; with twain he
covered his face.”
383–7. Cf. Col. 1:15–16: “Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: For by him
were all things created, that are in heaven and that are in earth.” For Milton the Son is not eternal, as in
Trinitarian doctrine, but is God’s first creation and the agent through whom he created all other beings.
Neither is he omniscient, nor omnipotent, nor immutable, nor co-equal with the Father, but participates
in those divine qualities only as the Father devolves them upon him. See Christian Doctrine 1.5.
389 ample Spirit. The power of God, not the Holy Spirit (see Christian Doctrine 1.6 ).
392 Dominations. An angelic order, standing here for all the rebel angels.
392–9. See 6.750–64, 824–92.

80
 
395 Heav’ns everlasting Frame, while o’re the necks

400

405

410

415

420

425

430

Thou drov’st of warring Angels disarraid.°
Back from pursuit thy Powers° with loud acclaime
Thee only extoll’d, Son of thy Fathers might,
To execute fierce vengeance on his foes,
Not so on Man; him through their malice fall’n,
Father of Mercie and Grace, thou didst not doome°
So strictly, but much more to pitie encline:
No sooner did thy dear and onely Son
Perceive thee purpos’d not to doom frail Man
So strictly, but much more to pitie enclin’d,
He to appease thy wrauth, and end the strife
Of Mercy and Justice in thy face discern’d,
Regardless of the Bliss wherein hee sat
Second to thee, offerd himself to die
For mans offence. O unexampl’d° love,
Love no where to be found less then Divine!
Hail Son of God, Saviour of Men, thy Name
Shall be the copious matter of my Song
Henceforth, and never shall my Harp thy praise
Forget, nor from thy Fathers praise disjoine.
Thus they in Heav’n, above the starry Sphear,
Thir happie hours in joy and hymning spent.
Mean while upon the firm opacous° Glove
Of this round World, whose first convex divides
The luminous inferior Orbs, enclos’d
From Chaos and th’ inroad of Darkness old,
Satan alighted walks: a Globe farr off
It seem’d, now seems a boundless Continent
Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night
Starless expos’d, and ever-threatning storms
Of Chaos blustring round, inclement skie;
Save on that side which from the wall of Heav’n
Though distant farr som small reflection gaines
Of glimmering air less vext° with tempest loud:
Here walk’d the Fiend at large in spacious field.

confused
angels

judge

without precedent

opaque

tossed around

412–15. The shift to first person suggests that Milton is quoting the angels singing as a single chorus, or that
he associates himself with their song, or both.
419–22 first convex. The outermost of the ten spheres that comprise the universe. Satan “alighted ” ( both
landed, and was illumined by the dim light reflected from heaven) and “walks” on the outer shell of that
sphere.

Book 3

435

440

445

450

455

460

As when a Vultur on Imaus bred,
Whose snowie ridge the roving Tartar bounds,
Dislodging from a Region scarce of prey
To gorge the flesh of Lambs or yeanling° Kids
On Hills where Flocks are fed, flies toward the Springs
Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams;
But in his way lights on the barren Plaines
Of Sericana, where Chineses drive
With Sails and Wind thir canie Waggons light:
So on this windie Sea of Land, the Fiend
Walk’d up and down alone bent on his prey,
Alone, for other Creature in this place
Living or liveless to be found was none,
None yet, but store° hereafter from the earth
Up hither like Aereal vapours flew
Of all things transitorie and vain, when Sin
With vanity had filld the works of men:
Both all things vain, and all who in vain things
Built thir fond° hopes of Glorie or lasting fame,
Or happiness in this or th’ other life;
All who have thir reward on Earth, the fruits
Of painful° Superstition and blind Zeal,
Naught seeking but the praise of men, here find
Fit retribution, emptie as thir deeds;
All th’ unaccomplisht° works of Natures hand,
Abortive,° monstrous, or unkindly° mixt,
Dissolvd on Earth, fleet° hither, and in vain,
Till final dissolution, wander here,
Not in the neighbouring Moon, as some have dreamd;
Those argent Fields more likely habitants,
Translated Saints, or middle Spirits hold
Betwixt th’ Angelical and Human kinde:

81

newborn

plenty

foolish

painstaking

imperfect
premature / unnaturally
float

431–9 Vultur. Vultures were said to be able to scent their prey across continents.
Imaus. Mountain
ridge extending north through Asia from modern Afghanistan to the Arctic Ocean, the regions (“ bounds”)
of the pillaging “roving Tartar.”
436. The rivers “Ganges” and “Hydaspes” (a tributary of the Indus) rise the mountains of northern India.
438–9 Sericana. A region in northwest China.
canie Waggons. Juan Gonzales de Mendoza described these
Chinese landships, made of cane or bamboo.
440–97. Milton’s Paradise of Fools (named in line 496) was inspired by Ariosto’s (less satiric) Limbo of Vanity
located in the moon (Orlando Furioso 34., stanzas 72–87; cf. PL 3.459). Milton’s region is reserved for deluded
followers of misplaced devotion, chiefly Roman Catholics.
461 Translated Saints. Holy patriarchs like Enoch (Gen. 5:24) and Elijah (2 Kgs 2:11), carried to the heavens
while yet alive.

82

465

470

475

480

485
 
Hither of ill-joyned Sons and Daughters born
First from the ancient World those Giants came
With many a vain exploit, though then renownd:
The builders next of Babel on the Plain
Of Sennaar, and still with vain designe
New Babels, had they wherewithall, would build:
Others came single; he who to be deemd
A God, leap’d fondly° into Ætna flames,
Empedocles, and hee who to enuoy
Plato’s Elysium, leap’d into the Sea,
Cleombrotus; and many more too long,
Embryo’s and Idiots, Eremits° and Friers
White, Black, and Grey, with all thir trumperie,°
Here Pilgrims roam, that stray’d so farr to seek
In Golgatha him dead, who lives in Heav’n;
And they who to be sure of Paradise
Dying put on the weeds° of Dominic,
Or in Franciscan think to pass disguis’d;
They pass the Planets seven, and pass the fixt,
And that Crystalline Sphear whose ballance weighs
The Trepidation talkt, and that first mov’d;
And now Saint Peter at Heavn’s Wicket° seems
To wait them with his Keys, and now at foot

foolishly

hermits
paraphernalia

garments

small pedestrian gate

463–5 Giants. Born of the unnatural marriages between the “sons of God ” and the daughters of men
(Gen. 6:4). See also PL 11.573–627, 683–99.
466 Babel. The tower, intended to reach heaven (Gen. 11:3 –9), became an emblem of pride and folly.
467 Sennaar. (the Vulgate form of Shinar), the plain of Babel on which the tower of “Babel” was built.
469–73 Empedocles. A Presocratic philosopher who threw himself into “Ætna” to conceal his mortality; the
volcano defeated his plan by casting up one of his sandals.
Cleombrotus. A youth who drowned himself to attain the immortality promised in Plato’s Phaedo.
474–5 Embryo’s and Idiots. Those not responsible morally, but still marked by original sin so they could
not enter heaven, were said by Catholic theologians to be held in Limbo. The “White” friars (“Friers”)
are Carmelites, the “Black” are Dominicans, and the “Grey” Franciscans.
477 Golgatha. Golgotha, “Place of the skull,” the hill where Christ was crucified. See Luke 24:5–6, “Why seek
ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen.”
478–80. Some try to ensure their salvation by wearing on their deathbed the robes of various religious orders.
481–5. These souls imagine their journey through the spheres in the Ptolemaic system: the seven then known
planets, the eighth sphere of the fixed stars, then the “Crystalline Sphear” (added to the Ptolemaic system
to account for anomalies in astronomical observations). Its “ Trepidation” (oscillation or trembling), measured by Libra (the scales, “ballance”), was much disputed (“talkt”) in Milton’s time. After the tenth sphere,
the Primum Mobile (“that first mov’d”) which imparts motion to all the rest, they imagine ascent to the
empyreal Heaven.
485 Keys. Cf. Matt. 16:19: “And I will give unto thee [Peter] the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall
be loosed in heaven.” See “Lycidas,” 110.

Book 3

490

495

500

505

510

515

Of Heav’ns ascent they lift thir Feet, when loe
A violent cross wind from either Coast
Blows them transverse ten thousand Leagues awry
Into the devious° Air; then might ye see
Cowles, Hoods and Habits with thir wearers tost
And flutterd into Raggs, then Reliques, Beads,°
Indulgences, Dispenses, Pardons, Bulls,°
The sport of Winds: all these upwhirld aloft
Fly o’re the backside of the World farr off
Into a Limbo large and broad, since calld
The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown
Long after, now unpeopl’d, and untrod;
All this dark Globe the Fiend found as he pass’d,
And long he wanderd, till at last a gleame
Of dawning light turnd thither-ward in haste
His travell’d° steps; farr distant he descries
Ascending by degrees magnificent
Up to the wall of Heaven a Structure high,
At top whereof, but farr more rich appeerd
The work as of a Kingly Palace Gate
With Frontispiece° of Diamond and Gold
Imbellisht, thick with sparkling orient° Gemmes
The Portal shon, inimitable on Earth
By Model, or by shading Pencil drawn.
The Stairs were such as whereon Jacob saw
Angels ascending and descending, bands
Of Guardians bright, when he from Esau fled
To Padan-Aram in the field of Luz,
Dreaming by night under the open Skie,
And waking cri’d, This is the Gate of Heav’n.
Each Stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood
There alwayes, but drawn up to Heav’n somtimes

83

erratic
rosary beads
papal edicts

travel-weary

portal
lustrous

490. The dress of the various religious orders.
492 Indulgences, Dispenses [dispensations], Pardons. Various grants set forth by the Roman Catholic Church
that could be earned or purchased to free one from the punishment due to sin, or from some religious duty.
They were seen as a scandal by the Protestant reformers. See the Pardoner’s Tale in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales.
510–15 Jacob fled to “Padan-Aram” (in Syria) after cheating his brother “Esau” of their father’s blessing. En
route, while sleeping in the field of “Luz” (Bethel), he dreamed of a ladder reaching to heaven on which
angels ascended and descended. When he awoke he cried, “this is none other but the house of God and
this is the gate of heaven” (Gen. 28:10–17).
516 mysteriously. The episode and the ladder received numerous symbolic and allegorical interpretations.

84

520

525

530

535

540

545

550
 
Viewless,° and underneath a bright Sea flow’d
Of Jasper, or of liquid Pearle, whereon
Who after came from Earth, sayling arriv’d,
Wafted by Angels, or flew o’re the Lake
Rapt in a Chariot drawn by fiery Steeds.
The Stairs were then let down, whether to dare
The Fiend by easie ascent, or aggravate
His sad exclusion from the dores of Bliss.
Direct against which op’nd from beneath,
Just o’re the blissful seat of Paradise,
A passage down to th’ Earth, a passage wide,
Wider by farr then that of after-times
Over Mount Sion, and, though that were large,
Over the Promis’d Land to God so dear,
By which, to visit oft those happy Tribes,
On high behests his Angels to and fro
Pass’d frequent, and his eye with choice° regard
From Paneas the fount of Jordans flood
To Beersaba, where the Holy Land
Borders on Æygpt and the Arabian shoare;
So wide the op’ning seemd, where bounds were set
To darkness, such as bound the Ocean wave.
Satan from hence now on the lower stair
That scal’d by steps of Gold to Heav’n Gate
Looks down with wonder at the sudden view
Of all this World at once. As when a Scout
Through dark and desart wayes with peril gone
All night; at last by break of chearful dawne
Obtains the brow of some high-climbing Hill,
Which to his eye discovers unaware
The goodly prospect of some forein land
First-seen, or some renown’d Metropolis
With glistering Spires and Pinnacles adornd,
Which now the Rising Sun guilds with his beams.
Such wonder seis’d, though after Heaven seen,
The Spirit maligne, but much more envy seis’d

invisible

discriminating

518–19. See Rev. 4:6 (“sea of glass like unto crystal”).
521–2. Lazarus was “Wafted” by the angels to heaven (Luke 16:22); Elijah was “Rapt” (carried away) up to
heaven in a “Chariot” of fire drawn by “fiery Steeds” (“ horses of fire,” 2 Kgs 2:11).
535–7. This later opening to heaven stretched from “Paneas” (Greek name for the city of Dan) near the source
of the Jordan in the north of Canaan to “Beersaba” (Beersheba) near the Egyptian border in the south, giving God a view of the entire land of Israel (cf. 1 Kgs 4:25).
552 though after Heaven seen. i.e., “even after having seen heaven.”

Book 3

555

560

565

570

575

580

585

At sight of all this World beheld so faire.
Round he surveys, and well might, where he stood
So high above the circling Canopie
Of Nights extended shade; from Eastern Point
Of Libra to the fleecie Starr that bears
Andromeda farr off Atlantic Seas
Beyond th’ Horizon; then from Pole to Pole
He views in bredth, and without longer pause
Down right into the Worlds first Region throws
His flight precipitant,° and windes with ease
Through the pure marble° Air his oblique way
Amongst innumerable Starrs, that shon
Stars distant, but nigh hand seemd other Worlds,
Or other Worlds they seemd, or happy Iles,
Like those Hesperian Gardens fam’d of old,
Fortunate Fields, and Groves, and flourie Vales,
Thrice happy Iles, but who dwelt happy there
He stayd not to enquire; above them all
The golden Sun in splendor likest Heaven
Allur’d his eye: Thither his course he bends
Through the calm Firmament;° but up or downe
By center, or eccentric, hard to tell
Or Longitude, where the great Luminarie°
Alooff ° the vulgar° Constellations thick,
That from his Lordly eye keep distance due,
Dispenses Light from farr; they as they move
Thir Starry dance in numbers° that compute
Days, months, & years, towards his all-chearing Lamp
Turn swift thir various motions, or are turned
By his Magnetic beam, that gently warms
The Univers, and to each inward part
With gentle penetration, though unseen,

85

rushing headlong
sparkling, smooth

sky
the sun
apart from / common

rhythms

557–9. In the zodiac, “Libra” in the east is diametrically opposite Aries or the Ram (“the fleecie Starr”) that
seems to carry the constellation “Andromeda” on its back in the west, in the Atlantic below the “Horizon.”
562–5 first Region. The upper air down to the Primum Mobile, the crystalline sphere and “innumerable
Starrs.”
566–71 other Worlds. The plurality of worlds was a topic of much speculation in Milton’s day (see
8.140–52). The gardens of the Hesperides and the Fortunate Isles (“happy Iles”) of Greek mythology, were
classical versions of paradise.
574–6. Satan cannot tell if he is flying up or down, or by a centric orbit that has the earth or the sun as its
center, or by an eccentric orbit that does not. Nor can he tell the distance he flew measured by degrees
(“Longitude”) along the ecliptic, the apparent orbit of the sun around the earth.
582–3. Kepler (in 1609) theorized that the sun’s magnetism caused planetary motion.

86

590

595

600

605

610

615
 
Shoots invisible vertue° even to the deep:
So wondrously was set his Station bright.
There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps
Astronomer in the Sun’s lucent Orbe
Through his glaz’d Optic Tube yet never saw.
The place he found beyond expression bright,
Compar’d with aught on Earth, Metal or Stone;
Not all parts like, but all alike informd
With radiant light, as glowing Iron with fire;
If mettal, part seems Gold, part Silver cleer;
If stone, Carbuncle most or Chrysolite,
Rubie or Topaz, to the Twelve that shon
In Aarons Brest-plate, and a stone besides
Imagind rather oft then elsewhere seen,
That stone, or like to that which here below
Philosophers in vain so long have sought,
In vain, though by thir powerful Art they binde
Volatil Hermes, and call up unbound
In various shapes old Proteus from the Sea,
Draind through a Limbec to his Native forme.
What wonder then if fields and regions here
Breathe forth Elixir pure, and Rivers run
Potable° Gold, when with one vertuous° touch
Th’ Arch-chimic° Sun so farr from us remote
Produces with Terrestrial Humor° mixt
Here in the dark so many precious things
Of colour glorious and effect so rare?
Here matter new to gaze the Devil met
Undazl’d, farr and wide his eye commands,
For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade,

vigor, energy

drinkable / powerful
chief alchemist
earth’s moisture

588–90. Galileo first observed sunspots through his telescope (“glaz’d Optic Tube”) in 1610.
596 Carbuncle. Any red gemstone.
Chrysolite. Any green gemstone.
597–8. In Exod. 28:15–21 “Aarons Brest-plate” is described as decorated with twelve different gems, corresponding to the twelve tribes of Israel.
598–605. Alchemists identified the philosopher’s stone with the urim on Aaron’s breastplate (Exod. 28:30);
this stone reputedly could cure all diseases, restore paradise, and transmute base metals to gold.
Alchemists would “binde” (solidify) mercury (“Volatil Hermes,” the winged god identified with that element) and dissolve, refine, or transform substances (identified with the shape-shifting god “Proteus”) to
their “Native forme” in a “Limbec” (alembic, the distilling apparatus of alchemists).
607 Elixir. The liquid form of the philosopher’s stone.
609–12. The sun’s rays were thought to penetrate the earth and produce precious metals and gems.
615–17. Before the Fall (and the consequent tipping of the earth’s axis or change in the path of the sun, see
10.668–89) shadows would disappear daily at noon at the “Æquator,” where the sun’s beams reach their
zenith (“Culminate”).

Book 3

620

625

630

635

640

645

650

But all Sun-shine, as when his Beams at Noon
Culminate from th’ Æquator, as they now
Shot upward still direct, whence no way round
Shadow from body opaque can fall, and the Aire,
No where so cleer, sharp’nd his visual ray
To objects distant farr, whereby he soon
Saw within kenn° a glorious Angel stand,
The same whom John saw also in the Sun:
His back was turnd, but not his brightness hid;
Of beaming sunnie Raies, a golden tiar°
Circl’d his Head, nor less his Locks behind
Illustrious° on his Shoulders fledge° with wings
Lay waving round; on som great charge imploy’d
He seemd, or fixt in cogitation deep.
Glad was the Spirit impure as now in hope
To find who might direct his wandring flight
To Paradise the happie seat of Man,
His journies end and our beginning woe.
But first he casts° to change his proper shape,
Which else might work him danger or delay:
And now a stripling Cherube he appeers,
Not of the prime, yet such as in his face
Youth smil’d Celestial, and to every Limb
Sutable grace diffus’d, so well he feignd;
Under a Coronet his flowing haire
In curles on either cheek plaid, wings he wore
Of many a colourd plume sprinkl’d with Gold,
His habit fit for speed succinct,° and held
Before his decent° steps a Silver wand.
He drew not nigh unheard, the Angel bright,
Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turnd,
Admonisht by his ear, and strait° was known
Th’ Arch-Angel Uriel, one of the seav’n
Who in Gods presence, neerest to his Throne
Stand ready at command, and are his Eyes

87

range of vision

tiara, crown
lustrous / feathered

contrives

close-fitting
decorous

at once

620 visual ray. The eye was thought to emit a beam onto the object perceived.
622–3. Cf. Rev. 19:17: “I saw an angel standing in the sun.”
636–7. A young “stripling” cherub not yet in the “prime” of life, or not of the first rank of angels.
648–53 Uriel. In Hebrew “Light [or fire] of God,” he is the angel named first among the seven who stood
before God’s “Throne” in the Apocryphal 1 Enoch 22:1. Zech. 4:10 states that “those seven . . . are the
eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole earth,” but Uriel is not mentioned there or anywhere else in the canonical Bible. See also Rev. 1:4.

88

655

660

665

670

675

680

685

690
 
That run through all the Heav’ns, or down to th’ Earth
Bear his swift errands over moist and dry,
O’re Sea and Land: him Satan thus accostes.
Uriel, for thou of those seav’n Spirits that stand
In sight of God’s high Throne; gloriously bright,
The first art wont° his great authentic will
Interpreter through highest Heav’n to bring,
Where all his Sons° thy Embassie attend;
And here art likeliest by supream decree
Like honour to obtain, and as his Eye
To visit oft this new Creation round;
Unspeakable desire to see, and know
All these his wondrous works, but chiefly Man,
His chief delight and favour,° him for whom
All these his works so wondrous he ordaind,
Hath brought me from the Quires of Cherubim
Alone thus wandring. Brightest Seraph tell
In which of all these shining Orbes hath Man
His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none,
But all these shining Orbes his choice to dwell;
That I may find him, and with secret gaze,
Or open admiration him behold
On whom the great Creator hath bestowd
Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces powrd;
That both in him and all things, as is meet,
The Universal Maker we may praise;
Who justly hath drivn out his Rebell Foes
To deepest Hell, and to repair that loss
Created this new happie Race of Men
To serve him better: wise are all his wayes.
So spake the false dissembler unperceiv’d;
For neither Man nor Angel can discern
Hypocrisie, the onely evil that walks
Invisible, except to God alone,
By his permissive will, through Heav’n and Earth:
And oft though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps
At wisdoms Gate, and to simplicitie
Resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill
Where no ill seems: Which now for once beguil’d
Uriel, though Regent of the Sun, and held
The sharpest sighted Spirit of all in Heav’n;
Who to the fraudulent Imposter foule

accustomed
angels

favorite

Book 3

695

700

705

710

715

720

725

In his uprightness answer thus returnd.
Fair Angel, thy desire which tends to know
The works of God, thereby to glorifie
The great Work-Maister, leads to no excess
That reaches blame, but rather merits praise
The more it seems excess, that led thee hither
From thy Empyreal Mansion thus alone,
To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps
Contented with report hear onely in heav’n:
For wonderful indeed are all his works,
Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all
Had in remembrance alwayes with delight;
But what created mind can comprehend
Thir number, or the wisdom infinite
That brought them forth, but hid thir causes deep.
I saw when at his Word the formless Mass,
This worlds material mould,° came to a heap:
Confusion heard his voice, and wilde uproar
Stood rul’d, stood vast infinitude confin’d;
Till at his second bidding darkness fled,
Light shon, and order from disorder sprung:
Swift to thir several Quarters hasted then
The cumbrous Elements, Earth, Flood, Aire, Fire,
And this Ethereal quintessence of Heav’n
Flew upward, spirited with° various forms,
That rowled orbicular,° and turnd to Starrs
Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move;
Each had his place appointed, each his course,
The rest in circuit walles this Universe.
Look downward on that Globe whose hither side
With light from hence, though but reflected, shines;
That place is Earth the seat of Man, that light
His day, which else as th’ other Hemisphere
Night would invade, but there the neighbouring Moon
(So call that opposite fair Starr) her aide

89

substance

animated by
in circular orbits

695–8. Aristotle in the Nicomachean Ethics locates virtue in the mean between excess and privation, but Uriel
exempts the glorification of God from that dictum.
705–7. No creature, including the angels and even the Son, know the “secret purposes, the knowledge of
which the Father has reserved to himself alone” (Christian Doctrine 1.5)
708–20. Compare Raphael’s story of the Creation to Adam in Book 7 below.
716. The fifth element (“quintessence,” ether) of which the incorruptible heavenly bodies were made.
721 The rest. The stars that form the sphere of the fixed stars, enclosing “this Universe.”

90
 
Timely interposes, and her monthly round
Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heav’n;
730 With borrowed light her countenance triform
Hence° fills and empties to enlighten th’ Earth,
And in her pale dominion checks the night.
That spot to which I point is Paradise,
Adams abode, those loftie shades his Bowre.
735 Thy way thou canst not miss, me mine requires.
Thus said, he turnd, and Satan bowing low,
As to superior Spirits is wont in Heaven,
Where honour due and reverence none neglects,
Took leave, and toward the coast of Earth beneath,
740 Down from the Ecliptic,° sped with hop’d success,
Throws his steep flight in many an Aerie wheele,
Nor staid, till on Niphates top he lights.

from the sun

the sun’s orbit

The End of the Third Book.

730 triform. Refers to the moon’s phases, but also to the ancient poets’ description of the moon’s triple nature:
Luna in heaven, Diana on earth, Hecate in hell.
742 Niphates. A mountain on the border between Armenia and Assyria.

BOOK 4
THE ARGUMENT

5

10

15

20

Satan now in prospect of Eden, and nigh the place where he must now attempt
the bold enterprize which he undertook alone against God and Man, falls into many
doubts with himself, and many passions, fear, envy, and despare; but at length
confirms himself in evil, journeys on to Paradise, whose outward prospect and
scituation is discribed, overleaps the bounds, sits in the shape of a Cormorant on
the Tree of life, as highest in the Garden to look about him. The Garden describ’d;
Satans first sight of Adam and Eve; his wonder at thir excellent form and happy state,
but with resolution to work thir fall; overhears thir discourse, thence gathers that
the Tree of knowledge was forbidden them to eat of, under penalty of death; and
thereon intends to found his Temptation, by seducing them to transgress: then leaves
them a while, to know further of thir state by some other means. Mean while Uriel
descending on a Sun-beam warns Gabriel, who had in charge the Gate of Paradise,
that some evil spirit had escap’d the Deep, and past at Noon by his Sphere in the
shape of a good Angel down to Paradise, discovered after by his furious gestures in
the Mount. Gabriel promises to find him ere morning. Night coming on, Adam and
Eve discourse of going to thir rest: thir Bower describ’d; thir Evening worship.
Gabriel drawing forth his Bands of Night-watch to walk the round of Paradise, appoints
two strong Angels to Adams Bower, least the evill spirit should be there doing some
harm to Adam or Eve sleeping; there they find him at the ear of Eve, tempting her
in a dream, and bring him, though unwilling, to Gabriel; by whom question’d, he
scornfully answers, prepares resistance, but hinder’d by a Sign from Heaven, flies
out of Paradise.

O For that warning voice, which he who saw
Th’ Apocalyps, heard cry in Heaven aloud,
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout,
Came furious down to be reveng’d on men,
5 Wo to the inhabitants on Earth! that now,
While time was, our first-Parents had bin warnd
The coming of thir secret foe, and scap’d
Haply° so scap’d his mortal° snare; for now

perhaps, happily / deadly

5. Cormorant. A large and voracious black sea-bird.
1–5. John of Patmos heard a cry warning of the “great dragon . . . called the Devil, and Satan” (Rev. 12:9)
when he and his angels were put to “second rout” in a second war in heaven: “Woe to the inhabiters of
the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down among you, having great wrath, because he knoweth
that he hath but a short time” (Rev. 12:12).
2 Apocalyps. Apocalypse, “unveiling,” the Greek title of the book of Revelation.

92

10

15

20

25

30

35

40
 
Satan, now first inflam’d with rage, came down,
The Tempter ere° th’ Accuser of man-kind,
To wreck° on innocent frail man his loss
Of that first Battel, and his flight to Hell:
Yet not rejoycing in his speed, though bold,
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast,
Begins his dire attempt, which nigh the birth
Now rowling,° boiles in his tumultuous brest,
And like a devillish Engine° back recoiles
Upon himself; horror and doubt distract
His troubl’d thoughts, and from the bottom stirr
The Hell within him, for within him Hell
He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell
One step no more then from himself can fly
By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair
That slumberd, wakes the bitter memorie
Of what he was, what is, and what must be
Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue.
Sometimes towards Eden which now in his view
Lay pleasant, his grievd look he fixes sad,
Sometimes towards Heav’n and the full-blazing Sun,
Which now sat high in his Meridian Towre:°
Then much revolving, thus in sighs began.
O thou that with surpassing Glory crownd,
Look’st from thy sole Dominion like the God
Of this new World; at whose sight all the Starrs
Hide thir diminisht heads; to thee I call,
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name
O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell, how glorious once above thy Spheare;
Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down
Warring in Heav’n against Heav’ns matchless King:

before being
avenge

revolving
cannon, plot

the height of noon

20–3. See note to lines 75–8.
27–8 Eden. The name derives from the Hebrew word for “delight.”
32–41. Milton’s nephew Edward Phillips wrote in his “Life of Milton” that these beginning lines of Satan’s
soliloquy were written several years before the poem was begun, intended then as the beginning of a tragedy
on the Fall. See Appendix A for Milton’s sketches for such a tragedy. Cf. Aeschylus’ tragedy, Prometheus
Bound, 88–112.
32–113. Compare Satan’s soliloquy with Adam’s after the Fall (10.720 – 844).
37. See John 3:20: “Every one that doeth evil hateth the light.”

Book 4

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

Ah wherefore! he deservd no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright eminence, and with his good
Upbraided° none; nor was his service hard.
What could be less then to afford him praise,
The easiest recompence, and pay him thanks,
How due! yet all his good prov’d ill in me,
And wrought but malice; lifted up so high
I sdeind° subjection, and thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit°
The debt immense of endless gratitude,
So burthensome, still° paying, still to ow;
Forgetful what from him I still receivd,
And understood not that a grateful mind
By owing° owes not, but still pays, at once
Indebted and dischargd; what burden then?
O had his powerful Destiny ordaind
Me some inferiour Angel, I had stood°
Then happie; no unbounded hope had rais’d
Ambition. Yet why not? som other Power°
As great might have aspir’d, and me though mean°
Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great
Fell not, but stand unshak’n, from within
Or from without, to all temptations arm’d.
Hadst thou the same free Will and Power to stand?
Thou hadst: whom hast thou then or what to accuse,
But Heav’ns free Love dealt equally to all?
Be then his Love accurst, since love or hate,
To me alike, it deals eternal woe.
Nay curs’d be thou; since against his thy will
Chose freely what it now so justly rues.
Me miserable! which way shall I flie
Infinite wrauth, and infinite despaire?
Which way I flie is Hell; my self am Hell;
And in the lowest deep a lower deep
Still threatning to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heav’n.

93

reproached

disdained
cancel
continually

owning, acknowledging

remained
angel
of low rank

43. Compare Satan’s claim at 5.857–61.
73 Me miserable! A Latinism, me miserum!
75–8. Contrast Satan’s boast at 1.254–5 and compare Marlowe’s Mephistopheles in Dr. Faustus 1.3.76, “Why,
this is hell, nor am I out of it.”

94

80

85

90

95

100

105

110

115
 
O then at last relent: is there no place
Left for Repentance, none for Pardon left?
None left but by submission; and that word
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduc’d
With other promises and other vaunts
Then to submit, boasting I could subdue
Th’ Omnipotent. Ay me, they little know
How dearly I abide° that boast so vaine,
Under what torments inwardly I groane;
While they adore me on the Throne of Hell,
With Diadem° and Sceptre high advanc’d
The lower still I fall, onely Supream
In miserie; such joy Ambition findes.
But say I could repent and could obtaine
By Act of Grace my former state; how soon
Would higth recal high thoughts, how soon unsay
What feign’d submission swore: ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent° and void.
For never can true reconcilement grow
Where wounds of deadly hate have peirc’d so deep:
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
And heavier fall: so should I purchase deare
Short intermission bought with double smart.
This knows my punisher; therefore as farr
From granting hee, as I from begging peace:
All hope excluded thus, behold in stead
Of us out-cast, exil’d, his new delight,
Mankind created, and for him this World.
So farwel Hope, and with Hope farwel Fear,
Farwel Remorse: all Good to me is lost;
Evil be thou my Good; by thee at least
Divided Empire with Heav’ns King I hold
By thee, and more then half perhaps will reigne;°
As Man ere long, and this new World shall know.
Thus while he spake, each passion dimm’d his face
Thrice chang’d with pale,° ire, envie and despair,
Which marrd his borrow’d visage, and betraid

79–80. See God’s speeches at 3.129–32 and 5.613–15.
94 Act of Grace. The legal term for a formal pardon; unmerited favor of God.
110. See Isa. 5:20: “Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil.”

endure

crown

forced

govern

pallor

Book 4

120

125

130

135

140

145

Him counterfet, if any eye beheld.
For heav’nly mindes from such distempers foule
Are ever cleer. Whereof hee soon aware,
Each perturbation smooth’d with outward calme,
Artificer of fraud; and was the first
That practisd° falshood under saintly shew,
Deep malice to conceale, couch’t° with revenge:
Yet not anough had practisd to deceive
Uriel once warnd; whose eye pursu’d him down
The way he went, and on th’ Assyrian mount°
Saw him disfigur’d, more then could befall
Spirit of happie sort: his gestures fierce
He markd and mad demeanour, then alone,
As he suppos’d, all unobserv’d, unseen.
So on he fares, and to the border comes,
Of Eden, where delicious Paradise,
Now nearer, Crowns with her enclosure green,
As with a rural mound the champain head
Of a steep wilderness, whose hairie sides
With thicket overgrown, grottesque° and wilde,
Access deni’d; and over head up grew
Insuperable highth of loftiest shade,
Cedar, and Pine, and Firr, and branching Palm,
A Silvan Scene, and as the ranks ascend
Shade above shade, a woodie Theatre
Of stateliest view. Yet higher then thir tops
The verdurous wall of paradise up sprung:
Which to our general Sire gave prospect large
Into his neather Empire neighbouring round.
And higher then that Wall a circling row
Of goodliest Trees loaden with fairest Fruit,
Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue
Appeerd, with gay enameld° colours mixt:

95

performed
hidden

Niphates

entangled

bright, variegated

118 distempers. Disorders arising from an imbalance of the four humors.
132–49. Paradise (paradeisos, garden) is a delightful (“delicious”) garden in a plateau (“champain head”) on
top of a steep, densely wooded hill situated in the east of the land of Eden, between the upper Tigris and
Euphrates rivers. Cf. Spenser’s Garden of Adonis (Faerie Queene 3.6.42–5).
133–6. A Freudian reading interprets the garden as an image of the female body, with its “mound” suggestive of the mons veneris, as in Spenser’s Garden of Adonis (Faerie Queene 3.6.43).
140–2 Silvan Scene. Echoes “silvus scæna,” Aeneid 1.164. As in a Greek amphitheater, the trees are set row
on row.

96
 
150 On which the Sun more glad impress’d his beams

155

160

165

170

175

Then in fair Evening Cloud, or humid Bow,°
When God hath showrd the earth; so lovely seemd
That Lantskip:° And of pure now purer aire
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires
Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
All sadness but despair: now gentle gales°
Fanning thir odoriferous° wings dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmie spoiles. As when to them who saile
Beyond the Cape of Hope,° and now are past
Mozambic, off at Sea North-East windes blow
Sabean Odours from the spicie shoare
Of Arabie the blest, with such delay
Well pleas’d they slack thir course, and many a League
Chear’d with the grateful° smell old Ocean smiles.
So entertaind those odorous sweets the Fiend
Who came thir bane,° though with them better pleas’d
Then Asmodeus with the fishie fume,
That drove him, though enamourd, from the Spouse
Of Tobits Son, and with a vengeance° sent
From Media post to Ægypt, there fast bound.
Now to th’ ascent of that steep savage° Hill
Satan had journied on, pensive and slow;
But further way found none, so thick entwin’d,
As one continu’d brake,° the undergrowth
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplext°
All path of Man or Beast that past that way:
One Gate there only was, and that look’d East
On th’ other side: which when th’ arch-fellon saw

rainbow
landscape

winds
fragrance-bearing

Cape of Good Hope

pleasing
poison

curse
wooded, wild

thicket
would have entangled

156–9. See Orlando Furioso 34.51, Ariosto’s Paradise, where “from flowers, fruits and grass the breezes stole /
The varied perfumes.”
161 Mozambic. Mozambique, off the southeast coast of Africa, noted for its fertility.
162 Sabean. Saba, the biblical Sheba (1 Kgs 10:1–13).
163 Arabie the blest. Arabia Felix, modern Yemen (incorporating Sheba, above), and noted for the “sweet odors
of myrrh and other odoriferous plants” that waft out to sea (Diodorus Siculus, Library of History 3.44).
165 old Ocean. The Titan Oceanus.
168–71. The Apocryphal book of Tobit (chapters 6–8) tells of Tobias, “Tobits Son,” who married Sara in “Media”
and avoided the fate of her previous seven husbands (killed on their wedding night by her demon lover
“Asmodeus”) by following the instructions of the angel Raphael to burn the heart and liver of a fish,
producing a fishy smell (“fishie fume”) to drive him off. Asmodeus then fled to Egypt where Raphael
“bound” him.

Book 4

97

180 Due entrance he disdaind, and in contempt,

185

190

195

200

205

210

At one slight bound high over leap’d all bound
Of Hill or highest Wall, and sheer° within
Lights on his feet. As when a prowling Wolfe,
Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey,
Watching where Shepherds pen thir Flocks at eeve
In hurdl’d Cotes° amid the field secure,
Leaps o’re the fence with ease into the Fould:
Or as a Thief bent to unhoord the cash
Of some rich Burgher,° whose substantial dores,
Cross-barrd and bolted fast, fear no assault,
In at the window climbs, or o’re the tiles;
So clomb this first grand Thief into Gods Fould:
So since into his Church lewd Hirelings climbe.
Thence up he flew, and on the Tree of Life,
The middle Tree and highest there that grew,
Sat like a Cormorant; yet not true Life
Thereby regaind, but sat devising Death
To them who liv’d; nor on the vertue° thought
Of that life-giving Plant, but only us’d
For prospect,° what well us’d had bin the pledge
Of immortality. So little knows
Any, but God alone, to value right
The good before him, but perverts best things
To worst abuse, or to thir meanest use.
Beneath him with new wonder now he views
To all delight of human sense expos’d
In narrow room Natures whole wealth, yea more,
A Heaven on Earth, for blissful Paradise
Of God the Garden was, by him in the East
Of Eden planted; Eden stretchd her Line
From Auran Eastward to the Royal Towrs

straight down

pens of woven reeds

town-dweller

power
as a lookout

193 lewd Hirelings. Base men interested only in money. Milton would have clergy support themselves, doing
away with tithes or state support. See his Considerations touching the Likeliest means to Remove Hirelings out
of the Church (1659), the condemnation of “hireling wolves” in his sonnet “To the Lord Cromwell,” and
“Lycidas,” 113–21.
194 Tree of Life. Cf. Gen. 2:9: “And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is
pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil.”
209–10. Cf. Gen. 2:8: “And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom
he had formed.”
211 Auran. The province of Haran or Hauran on the eastern border of Israel.

98

215

220

225

230

235

240
 
Of Great Seleucia, built by Grecian Kings,
Or where the Sons of Eden long before
Dwelt in Telassar: in this pleasant soile
His farr more pleasant Garden God ordaind;
Out of the fertil ground he caus’d to grow
All Trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste;
And all amid them stood the Tree of Life,
High eminent, blooming Ambrosial° Fruit
Of vegetable Gold; and next to Life
Our Death the Tree of knowledge grew fast by,
Knowledge of Good bought dear by knowing ill.
Southward through Eden went a River large,
Nor chang’d his course, but through the shaggie hill
Pass’d underneath ingulft, for God had thrown
That Mountain as his Garden mould° high rais’d
Upon the rapid current, which through veins
Of porous Earth with kindly° thirst up drawn,
Rose a fresh Fountain, and with many a rill
Waterd the Garden; thence united fell
Down the steep glade, and met the neather Flood,
Which from his darksom passage now appeers,
And now divided into four main Streams,
Runs divers, wandring many a famous Realme
And Country whereof here needs no account,
But rather to tell how, if Art could tell,
How from that Saphire Fount the crisped° Brooks,
Rowling on Orient° Pearl and sands of Gold,
With mazie error under pendant shades
Ran Nectar, visiting each plant, and fed
Flours worthy of Paradise which not nice° Art
In Beds and curious Knots, but Nature boon

divinely fragrant, immortal

form, rich earth
natural

wavy, rippling
lustrous, precious

fastidious, precise

212–14 Great Seleucia. A powerful city on the Tigris, south of Baghdad, built by Seleucus Nicator,
Alexander the Great’s general (“Grecian Kings”) as seat of government for his Syrian empire. Called
“Great” to distinguish it from other cities with the same name, it marks the eastern boundary of Eden.
Telassar. The ancient name of Seleucia, mentioned in the Old Testament twice as a place where the Assyrians
destroyed “the Children of Eden” (2 Kgs 19:12 and Isa. 37:12).
221–2. See Christian Doctrine 1.10: “It was called the tree of knowledge of good and evil from the event, for
since it was tasted, not only do we know evil, but we do not even know good except through evil.”
223 a River large. The Tigris, identified at 9.71.
229–35. Cf. Gen. 2:10: “a river went out of Eden to water the garden: and from thence it was parted, and
became into four heads.”
239 mazie error. Meandering as in a maze (“error” here keeps its Latin sense, errare, wandering).
242 curious Knots. Flower beds laid out in intricate regular designs, associated with Tudor garden art.
boon. Bountiful.

Book 4

245

250

255

260

265

270

Powrd forth profuse on Hill and Dale and Plaine,
Both where the morning Sun first warmly smote
The open field, and where the unpierc’t shade
Imbround° the noontide Bowrs: Thus was this place,
A happy rural seat of various view;
Groves whose rich Trees wept odorous Gumms and Balme,
Others whose fruit burnisht with Golden Rinde
Hung amiable,° Hesperian Fables true,
If true, here only, and of delicious taste:
Betwixt them Lawns, or level Downs,° and Flocks
Grasing the tender herb, were interpos’d,
Or palmie hilloc, or the flourie lap°
Of som irriguous° Valley spred her store,
Flours of all hue, and without Thorn the Rose:
Another side, umbrageous Grots° and Caves
Of coole recess, o’re which the mantling° vine
Layes forth her purple Grape, and gently creeps
Luxuriant; mean while murmuring waters fall
Down the slope hills, disperst, or in a Lake,
That to the fringed Bank with Myrtle crownd,
Her chrystal mirror holds, unite thir streams.
The Birds thir quire apply; aires, vernal aires,
Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune
The trembling leaves, while Universal Pan
Knit° with the Graces and the Hours in dance
Led on th’ Eternal Spring. Not that faire field
Of Enna, where Proserpin gathering flours
Her self a fairer Floure by gloomie Dis
Was gatherd, which cost Ceres all that pain
To seek her through the world; nor that sweet Grove
Of Daphne by Orontes, and th’ inspir’d
Castalian Spring, might with this Paradise

99

darkened

lovely
open land
valley, hollow
well-watered
shady grottos
enveloping

clasping hands

247 seat. Like a country estate, with a variety of prospects (“various view”).
250–1 Hesperian Fables. By contrast to the feigned golden apples of the Hesperides (fabled paradisal islands
in the Western Ocean) Eden has “true” golden apples.
266–7 Universal Pan. The wood-god “Pan” was taken as a symbol of “Universal” nature since his name in
Greek means “all.”
Graces. Euphrosyne, Aglaia, and Thalia attend upon Venus, as in Botticelli’s
Primavera.
Hours. Horae, goddesses of the seasons. See Milton’s “L’Allegro,” 11–24, and Comus 986.
268–84. Even as he denies the comparison Milton associates Eden with four famous beauty spots of classical myth.
268–72. Enna. A lovely meadow in Sicily from which “Proserpin” was kidnapped by “gloomie Dis” (Pluto);
her mother “Ceres” sought her throughout the world.
272–5 Grove / Of Daphne. A laurel grove on the river “Orontes” in Syria, whose “inspir’d/Castalian Spring”
was named for the Muses’ fountain near Parnassus and was said to bestow prophetic powers.

100
 
275 Of Eden strive; nor that Nyseian Ile

280

285

290

295

300

Girt with the River Triton, where old Cham,
Whom Gentiles Ammon call and Lybian Jove,
Hid Amalthea and her Florid° Son
Young Bacchus from his Stepdame Rhea’s eye;
Nor where Abassin Kings thir issue Guard,
Mount Amara, though this by som suppos’d
True Paradise under the Ethiop Line
By Nilus° head, enclosd with shining Rock,
A whole days journy high, but wide remote
From this Assyrian Garden,° where the Fiend
Saw undelighted all delight, all kind
Of living Creatures new to sight and strange:
Two of far nobler shape erect and tall,
Godlike erect, with native Honour clad
In naked Majestie seemd Lords of all,
And worthie seemd, for in thir looks Divine
The image of thir glorious Maker shon,
Truth, wisdome, Sanctitude severe° and pure,
Severe but in true filial freedom plac’t;
Whence true autoritie in men; though both
Not equal, as thir sex not equal seemd;
For contemplation hee and valour formd,
For softness shee and sweet attractive Grace,
Hee for God only, shee for God in him:
His fair large Front° and Eye sublime° declar’d
Absolute rule; and Hyacinthin Locks
Round from his parted forelock manly hung
Clustring, but not beneath his shoulders broad:
Shee as a vail down to the slender waste

wine-flushed

Nile’s
Eden

austere

forehead / noble

275–9 Nyseian Ile. Nysa in the river “Triton” in Tunisia was where “Ammon,” an Egyptian god, identified
with Jupiter (“Jove”) and with Noah’s son “Cham” (Ham) hid the nymph “Amalthea” and his child by her,
“Bacchus,” from his wife “Rhea.”
280–4 Mount Amara. At the source of the Nile (“Nilus head”) at the Equator (“Ethiop Line”), in splendid
palaces amid paradisal gardens, the “Abassin” (Abyssinian) kings kept their sons (“issue”) to avoid sedition.
Peter Heylyn, in his Cosmographie (1652), said it was “a dayes journey high,” and that “some have taken
(but mistaken) it for the place of Paradise” (4.64).
301 Hyacinthin. Curled. Cf. Odysseus’ hair that “hung down like hyacinthine petals” shining like “gold on
silver” (Odyssey 6.231–2).
302–8. See 1 Cor. 11:14–15: “if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him . . . But if a woman have long
hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given her for a covering.” The AV glosses “covering” to indicate
that “she is under the power of her husband.” Royalists were often derided by Puritans for their long hair.
Compare Eve’s “Disheveld” and “wanton” ringlets to nature in Eden (4.236 – 43).

Book 4

101

305 Her unadorned golden tresses wore

310

315

320

325

330

335

340

Disheveld, but in wanton° ringlets wav’d
As the Vine curles her tendrils, which impli’d
Subjection, but requir’d with gentle sway,°
And by her yielded, by him best receivd,
Yielded with coy° submission, modest pride,
And sweet reluctant amorous delay.
Nor those mysterious° parts were then conceald,
Then was not guiltie shame, dishonest° shame
Of natures works, honor dishonorable,
Sin-bred, how have ye troubl’d all mankind
With shews instead, meer shews of seeming pure,
And banisht from mans life his happiest life,
Simplicitie and spotless innocence.
So passd they naked on, nor shund the sight
Of God or Angel, for they thought no ill:
So hand in hand they passd, the lovliest pair
That ever since in loves imbraces met,
Adam the goodliest° man of men since borne
His Sons, the fairest of her Daughters Eve.
Under a tuft of shade that on a green
Stood whispering soft, by a fresh Fountain side
They sat them down, and after no more toil
Of thir sweet Gardning labour then suffic’d
To recommend coole Zephyr, and made ease
More easie, wholsom thirst and appetite
More grateful, to thir Supper Fruits they fell,
Nectarine° Fruits which the compliant boughes
Yielded them, side-long as they sat recline
On the soft downie Bank damaskt° with flours:
The savourie pulp they chew, and in the rinde
Still as they thirsted scoop the brimming stream;
Nor gentle purpose,° nor endearing smiles
Wanted,° nor youthful dalliance as beseems
Fair couple, linkt in happie nuptial League,
Alone as they. About them frisking playd
All Beasts of th’ Earth, since wilde, and of all chase°
In Wood or Wilderness, Forrest or Den;
Sporting the Lion rampd,° and in his paw

329 Zephyr. God of the west wind, hence, to make a cool breeze welcome.

unrestrained, luxuriant
persuasion
shyly reserved
secret, awe-inspiring
unchaste

most handsome

sweet as nectar
interwoven, variegated

conversation
lacked

animals (later) hunted
stood on hind legs

102

345

350

355

360

365

370

375
 
Dandl’d the Kid; Bears, Tygers, Ounces,° Pards°
Gambold before them, th’ unwieldy Elephant
To make them mirth us’d all his might, and wreathd
His Lithe Proboscis;° close the Serpent sly
Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine
His breaded train, and of his fatal guile
Gave proof unheeded; others on the grass
Coucht, and now fild with pasture gazing sat,
Or Bedward ruminating:° for the Sun
Declin’d° was hasting now with prone carreer°
To th’ Ocean Iles,° and in th’ ascending Scale°
Of Heav’n the Starrs that usher Evening rose:
When Satan still in gaze, as first he stood,
Scarce thus at length faild speech recoverd sad.
O Hell! what doe mine eyes with grief behold,
Into our room° of bliss thus high advanc’t
Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps,
Not Spirits, yet to heav’nly Spirits bright
Little inferior; whom my thoughts pursue
With wonder, and could love, so lively shines
In them Divine resemblance, and such grace
The hand that formd them on thir shape hath pourd.
Ah gentle pair, yee little think how nigh
Your change approaches, when all these delights
Will vanish and deliver ye to woe,
More woe, the more your taste is now of joy;
Happie, but for so happie° ill secur’d
Long to continue, and this high seat your Heav’n
Ill fenc’t for Heav’n to keep out such a foe
As now is enterd; yet no purpos’d foe
To you whom I could pittie thus forlorne
Though I unpittied: League with you I seek,
And mutual amitie so streight,° so close,
That I with you must dwell, or you with me
Henceforth; my dwelling haply° may not please
Like this fair Paradise, your sense, yet such

lynxes / leopards

trunk

chewing the cud
sinking / sharp descent
the Azores / Libra

place

such happiness

intimate
perhaps

344. See Isa. 11:6: “The leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling
together.”
348 Insinuating. moving sinuously, twisting.
Gordian twine. cords as convoluted as the Gordian knot
which Alexander the Great had to cut with his sword.
361–5. See Ps. 8:5: “For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory
and honour.”

Book 4

103

380 Accept your Makers work; he gave it me,

385

390

395

400

405

410

Which I as freely give; Hell shall unfold,
To entertain you two, her widest Gates,
And send forth all her Kings; there will be room,
Not like these narrow limits,° to receive
Your numerous ofspring; if no better place,
Thank him who puts me loath to this revenge
On you who wrong me not for° him who wrongd.
And should I at your harmless innocence
Melt, as I doe, yet public reason just,
Honour and Empire with revenge enlarg’d,
By conquering this new World, compels me now
To do what else though damnd I should abhorre.
So spake the Fiend, and with necessitie,
The Tyrants plea, excus’d his devilish deeds.
Then from his loftie stand on that high Tree
Down he alights among the sportful Herd
Of those fourfooted kindes, himself now one,
Now other, as thir shape servd best his end
Neerer to view his prey, and unespi’d
To mark what of thir state he more might learn
By word or action markt: about them round
A Lion now he stalkes with fierie glare,
Then as a Tyger, who by chance hath spi’d
In some Purlieu° two gentle Fawnes at play,
Strait couches close, then rising changes oft
His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground
Whence rushing he might surest seize them both
Gript in each paw: When Adam first of men
To first of women Eve thus moving speech,
Turnd him all eare to hear new utterance flow.
Sole° partner and sole° part of all these joyes,
Dearer thy self then all; needs must the Power
That made us, and for us this ample World
Be infinitly good, and of his good

the garden’s bounds

in place of

outskirts of a forest

only / unique

383 Kings. Cf. Isaiah’s prophecy of the fall of Babylon (Isa. 14:9) promising to stir up to “meet thee at thy
coming . . . all the chief ones of the earth . . . all the kings of the nations.” The reference suggests that
Hell is (and will be) populated by kings. Some of the fallen angels bear monarchical titles: Princedoms,
Dominations, Thrones, etc.
389–94. Satan is cast as a Machiavellian politician and tyrant, appealing to reason of state (“public reason”),
“Honour and Empire,” and “necessitie, / The Tyrants plea” to justify evil deeds.
402–8. When Satan inhabits them, the future predators foreshadow their natures after the Fall. couchant.
Lying close to the ground, ready to pounce.

104
 
415 As liberal and free as infinite,

420

425

430

435

440

445

That rais’d us from the dust and plac’t us here
In all this happiness, who at his hand
Have nothing merited, nor can performe
Aught whereof hee hath need, hee who requires
From us no other service then to keep
This one, this easie charge, of all the Trees
In Paradise that bear delicious fruit
So various, not to taste that onely Tree
Of knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life,
So neer grows Death to Life, what ere Death is,
Som dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou knowst
God hath pronounc’t it death to taste that Tree,
The only sign of our obedience left
Among so many signes of power and rule
Conferrd upon us, and Dominion giv’n
Over all other Creatures that possess
Earth, Aire, and Sea. Then let us not think hard
One easie prohibition, who enjoy
Free leave so large to all things else, and choice
Unlimited of manifold delights:
But let us ever praise him, and extoll
His bountie, following our delightful task
To prune these growing Plants, and tend these Flours,
Which were it toilsom, yet with thee were sweet.
To whom thus Eve repli’d. O thou for whom
And from whom I was formd flesh of thy flesh,
And without whom am to no end,° my Guide
And Head, what thou hast said is just and right.
For wee to him indeed all praises owe,
And daily thanks, I chiefly who enjoy
So farr the happier Lot, enjoying thee
Præeminent by so much odds, while thou
Like consort to thy self canst no where find.

have no purpose

423–7. See Gen. 2:16–17: “Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat: But of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.”
430–2. See Gen. 1:26: “And God said, Let us make man in our image . . . and let them have dominion over
the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle . . . , and over every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth.”
443 Head. Cf. 1 Cor. 11:3: “the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and the
head of Christ is God.”
447 by so much odds. By such a large difference.

Book 4

450

455

460

465

470

475

480

That day I oft remember, when from sleep
I first awak’t, and found my self repos’d°
Under a shade of flours, much wondring where
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how.
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
Of waters issu’d from a Cave and spread
Into a liquid Plain, then stood unmov’d
Pure as th’ expanse of Heav’n; I thither went
With unexperienc’t thought, and laid me downe
On the green bank, to look into the cleer
Smooth Lake, that to me seemd another Skie.
As I bent down to look, just opposite,
A Shape within the watry gleam appeard
Bending to look on me, I started back,
It started back, but pleas’d I soon returnd,
Pleas’d it returnd as soon with answering looks
Of sympathie and love; there I had fixt
Mine eyes till now, and pin’d with vain° desire,
Had not a voice thus warnd me, What thou seest,
What there thou seest fair Creature is thy self,
With thee it came and goes: but follow me,
And I will bring thee where no shadow staies°
Thy coming, and thy soft imbraces, hee
Whose image thou art, him thou shalt enjoy
Inseparablie thine, to him shalt beare
Multitudes like thy self, and thence be call’d
Mother of human Race: what could I doe,
But follow strait,° invisibly thus led?
Till I espi’d thee, fair indeed and tall,
Under a Platan,° yet methought less faire,
Less winning soft, less amiablie milde,
Then that smooth watry image; back I turnd,
Thou following cryd’st aloud, Return faire Eve,
Whom fli’st thou? whom thou fli’st, of him thou art,
His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent
Out of my side to thee, neerest my heart

105

resting

futile

hinders, awaits

at once
plane tree

449–91. Compare Adam’s account of his creation and marriage to Eve (8.250 –520).
456–76. Eve’s experience parallels, with significant differences, the story of Narcissus, who fell in love with
his own reflection and pined away; he was then transformed into the flower bearing his name (Ovid,
Metamorphoses 3.402–510).
475 Mother of human Race. Cf. Gen. 3:20, “Adam called his wife’s name Eve, because she was the mother
of all the living.”

106
 
485 Substantial Life, to have thee by my side

490

495

500

505

510

515

520

Henceforth an individual° solace dear;
Part of my Soul I seek thee, and thee claim
My other half: with that thy gentle hand
Seisd mine, I yielded, and from that time see
How beauty is excelld by manly grace
And wisdom, which alone is truly fair.
So spake our general Mother, and with eyes
Of conjugal attraction unreprov’d,
And meek surrender, half imbracing leand
On our first Father, half her swelling Breast
Naked met his under the flowing Gold
Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight
Both of her Beauty and submissive Charms
Smil’d with superior Love, as Jupiter
On Juno smiles, when he impregns° the Clouds
That shed May Flowers; and press’d her Matron lip
With kisses pure: aside the Devil turnd
For envie, yet with jealous leer maligne
Ey’d them askance, and to himself thus plaind.°
Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two
Imparadis’t in one anothers arms
The happier Eden, shall enjoy thir fill
Of bliss on bliss, while I to Hell am thrust,
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,
Among our other torments not the least,
Still° unfulfill’d with pain of longing pines;
Yet let me not forget what I have gain’d
From thir own mouths; all is not theirs it seems:
One fatal Tree there stands of Knowledge call’d,
Forbidden them to taste: Knowledge forbidd’n?
Suspicious, reasonless. Why should thir Lord
Envie° them that? can it be sin to know,
Can it be death? and do they onely stand
By Ignorance, is that thir happie state,
The proof of thir obedience and thir faith?
O fair foundation laid whereon to build
Thir ruine! Hence I will excite thir minds

inseparable, separate

impregnates

complained

continually

begrudge

499–501. In Iliad 14.346–51 Zeus (“Jupiter”), god of the sky, and Hera (“Juno”), goddess of the air, make love
under a cloud; their union was sometimes allegorized as a union of aether and air. Milton’s Jupiter impregnates the clouds with the seeds of flowers that grow after rain.

Book 4

525

530

535

540

545

550

555

With more desire to know, and to reject
Envious commands, invented with designe
To keep them low whom knowledge might exalt
Equal with Gods; aspiring to be such,
They taste and die: what likelier can ensue?
But first with narrow search I must walk round
This Garden, and no corner leave unspi’d;
A chance but chance may lead where I may meet
Some wandring Spirit of Heav’n, by Fountain side,
Or in thick shade retir’d, from him to draw
What further would be learnt. Live while ye may,
Yet happie pair; enjoy, till I return,
Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed.
So saying, his proud step he scornful turn’d,
But with sly circumspection, and began
Through wood, through waste, o’re hill, o’re dale his roam°
Mean while in utmost Longitude,° where Heav’n
With Earth and Ocean meets, the setting Sun
Slowly descended, and with right aspect
Against the eastern Gate of Paradise
Leveld his eevning Rayes: it was a Rock
Of Alablaster, pil’d up to the Clouds,
Conspicuous farr,° winding with one ascent
Accessible from Earth, one entrance high;
The rest was craggie cliff, that overhung
Still° as it rose, impossible to climbe.
Betwixt these rockie Pillars Gabriel sat
Chief of th’ Angelic Guards, awaiting night;
About him exercis’d Heroic Games
Th’ unarmed Youth of Heav’n, but nigh at hand
Celestial Armourie, Shields, Helmes, and Speares,
Hung high with Diamond flaming, and with Gold.
Thither came Uriel, gliding through the Eeven
On a Sun beam, swift as a shooting Starr
In Autumn thwarts the night, when vapors fir’d
Impress the Air, and shews the Mariner
From what point of his Compass to beware

107

wandering
farthest west

from afar

continually

544–5 Alablaster. White, translucent marble veined with colors.
549 Gabriel. Hebrew, “Strength of God.” A tradition (see 1 Enoch 20:7) gave Gabriel charge of Paradise.
557–61 thwarts. Passes over, obstructs.
vapors fir’d. Combustible exhalations from the earth,
thought to cause shooting stars, which would foretell storms, “Impetuous winds.”

108
 
560 Impetuous winds: he thus began in haste.

565

570

575

580

585

590

595

Gabriel, to thee thy course by Lot hath giv’n
Charge and strict watch that to this happie place
No evil thing approach or enter in;
This day at highth of Noon came to my Spheare
A Spirit, zealous, as he seem’d, to know
More of th’ Almighties works, and chiefly Man
Gods latest Image: I describ’d° his way
Bent all on speed, and markt his Aerie Gate;°
But in the Mount that lies from Eden North,
Where he first lighted, soon discernd his looks
Alien from Heav’n, with passions foul obscur’d:
Mine eye pursu’d him still, but under shade
Lost sight of him; one of the banisht crew
I fear, hath ventur’d from the deep, to raise
New troubles; him thy care must be to find.
To whom the winged Warriour thus returnd:
Uriel, no wonder if thy perfet sight,
Amid the Suns bright circle where thou sitst,
See farr and wide: in at this Gate none pass
The vigilance° here plac’t, but such as come
Well known from Heav’n; and since Meridian hour°
No Creature thence: if Spirit of other sort,
So minded, have oreleapt these earthie bounds
On purpose, hard thou knowst it to exclude
Spiritual substance with corporeal barr.
But if within the circuit of these walks,
In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom
Thou tellst, by morrow dawning I shall know.
So promis’d hee, and Uriel to his charge
Returnd on that bright beam, whose point now rais’d
Bore him slope downward to the Sun now fall’n
Beneath th’ Azores; whither the prime Orb,°
Incredible how swift, had thither rowl’d°
Diurnal,° or this less volubil° Earth
By shorter flight to th’ East, had left him there
Arraying with reflected Purple and Gold
The Clouds that on his Western Throne attend:
Now came still Eevning on, and Twilight gray

descried, observed
journey, gait

vigilant guard
noon

the sun
orbited
daily / swift-turning

592–5. Here and elsewhere Milton describes the cosmos in both Ptolemaic and Copernican terms.

Book 4

600

605

610

615

620

625

630

635

640

Had in her sober Liverie all things clad;
Silence accompanied, for Beast and Bird,
They to thir grassie Couch, these to thir Nests
Were slunk, all but the wakeful Nightingale;
She all night long her amorous descant° sung;
Silence was pleas’d: now glow’d the Firmament
With living Saphirs:° Hesperus° that led
The starrie Host, rode brightest, till the Moon
Rising in clouded Majestie, at length
Apparent° Queen unvaild her peerless light,
And o’re the dark her Silver Mantle threw.
When Adam thus to Eve: Fair Consort, th’ hour
Of night, and all things now retir’d to rest
Mind us of like repose, since God hath set
Labour and rest, as day and night to men
Successive, and the timely dew of sleep
Now falling with soft slumbrous weight inclines
Our eye-lids; other Creatures all day long
Rove idle unimploid, and less need rest;
Man hath his daily work of body or mind
Appointed, which declares his Dignitie,
And the regard° of Heav’n on all his waies;
While other Animals unactive range,
And of thir doings God takes no account.
To morrow ere fresh Morning streak the East
With first approach of light, we must be ris’n,
And at our pleasant labour, to reform
Yon flourie Arbors, yonder Allies green,
Our walk at noon, with branches overgrown,
That mock our scant manuring,° and require
More hands then ours to lop thir wanton growth:
Those Blossoms also, and those dropping Gumms,
That lie bestrowne unsightly and unsmooth,
Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease;
Mean while, as Nature wills, Night bids us rest.
To whom thus Eve with perfet beauty adornd.
My Author° and Disposer, what thou bidst
Unargu’d I obey; so God ordains,
God is thy Law, thou mine: to know no more
Is womans happiest knowledge and her praise.
With thee conversing I forget all time,
All seasons° and thir change, all please alike.

109

melody
stars / Venus, the evening star

manifest

attention, esteem

cultivation

originator, authority

times of day

110

645

650

655

660

665

670

675
 
Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet,
With charm° of earliest Birds; pleasant the Sun
When first on this delightful Land he spreads
His orient° Beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flour,
Glistring with dew; fragrant the fertil earth
After soft showers; and sweet the coming on
Of grateful Eevning milde, then silent Night
With this her solemn Bird° and this fair Moon,
And these the Gemms of Heav’n, her starrie train:
But neither breath of Morn when she ascends
With charm of earliest Birds, nor rising Sun
On this delightful land, nor herb, fruit, floure,
Glistring with dew, nor fragrance after showers,
Nor grateful Eevning mild, nor silent Night
With this her solemn Bird, nor walk by Moon,
Or glittering Starr-light without thee is sweet.
But wherfore all night long shine these, for whom
This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes?
To whom our general Ancestor repli’d.
Daughter of God and Man, accomplisht Eve,
Those have thir course to finish, round the Earth,
By morrow Eevning, and from Land to Land
In order, though to Nations yet unborn,
Ministring light prepar’d, they set and rise;
Least total darkness should by Night regaine
Her old possession, and extinguish life
In Nature and all things, which these soft fires
Not only enlighten, but with kindly° heate
Of various influence foment° and warme,
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down
Thir stellar vertue on all kinds that grow
On Earth, made hereby apter to receive
Perfection from the Suns more potent Ray.
These then, though unbeheld in deep of night,
Shine not in vain, nor think, though men were none,
That heav’n would want° spectators, God want praise;

song
from the east, lustrous

nightingale

natural, benign
cherish with heat

lack

641–56. This embedded love lyric, replete with striking rhetorical figures of circularity and repetition, displays Eve’s poetic talents. It is constructed as an epanalepsis, a figure which begins and ends with the same
word (“Sweet / sweet”) after intervening matter.
670–3 Temper. Heal or refresh by restoring the proper balance of elements or humors. The stars were thought
to have their own occult influence, and also to moderate that of the sun.

Book 4

680

685

690

695

700

705

710

Millions of spiritual Creatures walk the Earth
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep:
All these with ceasless praise his works behold
Both day and night: how often from the steep
Of echoing Hill or Thicket have we heard
Celestial voices to the midnight air,
Sole, or responsive each to others note
Singing thir great Creator: oft in bands
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding° walk,
With Heav’nly touch of instrumental sounds
In full harmonic number joind, thir songs
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven.
Thus talking hand in hand alone they pass’d
On to thir blissful Bower; it was a place
Chos’n by the sovran Planter, when he fram’d°
All things to mans delightful use; the roofe
Of thickest covert was inwoven shade
Laurel and Mirtle, and what higher grew
Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side
Acanthus, and each odorous bushie shrub
Fenc’d up the verdant wall; each beauteous flour,
Iris all hues, Roses, and Gessamin°
Rear’d high thir flourisht° heads between, and wrought
Mosaic; underfoot the Violet,
Crocus, and Hyacinth with rich inlay
Broiderd the ground, more colour’d then with stone
Of costliest Emblem:° other Creature here
Beast, Bird, Insect, or Worm durst enter none;
Such was thir awe of Man. In shadier Bower
More sacred and sequesterd,° though but feignd,
Pan or Silvanus never slept, nor Nymph,
Nor Faunus haunted. Here in close recess
With Flowers, Garlands, and sweet-smelling Herbs
Espoused Eve deckt first her Nuptial Bed,
And heav’nly Quires the Hymenæan sung,

111

make their rounds

fashioned

jasmine
flowering

inlaid with gemstones

secluded

688 Divide the night. Mark the watches of the night; also, perform musical divisions, elaborate melodic
passages.
691 sovran Planter. See Gen. 2:8: “God planted a garden eastward in Eden.”
707–8. Forest and field deities of classical mythology. “Pan,” “Silvanus,” and “Faunus” were fertility gods, halfman, half-goat.
711 Hymenæan. Wedding song. Hymen was the classical god of marriage.

112

715

720

725

730

735

740
 
What day the genial° Angel to our Sire
Brought her in naked beauty more adorn’d,
More lovely then Pandora, whom the Gods
Endowd with all thir gifts, and O too like
In sad event,° when to the unwiser Son
Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnar’d
Mankind with her faire looks, to be aveng’d
On him who had stole Joves authentic° fire.
Thus at thir shadie Lodge arriv’d, both stood,
Both turnd, and under op’n Skie ador’d
The God that made both Skie, Air, Earth and Heav’n
Which they beheld, the Moons resplendent Globe
And starrie Pole:° Thou also mad’st the Night,
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the Day,
Which we in our appointed work imployd
Have finisht happie in our mutual help
And mutual love, the Crown of all our bliss
Ordaind by thee, and this delicious place
For us too large, where thy abundance wants
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground.
But thou hast promis’d from us two a Race
To fill the Earth, who shall with us extoll
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake,
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep.
This said unanimous, and other Rites
Observing none, but adoration pure
Which God likes best, into thir inmost bowre
Handed° they went; and eas’d° the putting off
These troublesom disguises which wee wear,
Strait side by side were laid, nor turnd I weene°
Adam from his fair Spouse, nor Eve the Rites
Mysterious° of connubial Love refus’d:

presiding over marriage

outcome

own, original

the sky

hand in hand / spared
surmise
awe-inspiring, sacred

714–19 Pandora. Pandora (Greek, “all gifts”) was an artificial woman, molded of clay, bestowed by the gods
on Epimetheus (“afterthought”), brother of Prometheus (“forethought”), who angered the gods by stealing Jove’s fire for man. She brought a box that foolish Epimetheus (“the unwiser Son / Of Japhet”) opened,
releasing all the ills of the human race, leaving only hope trapped inside. The brothers were sons of the
Titan Iapetos, who was often identified with Japhet, the third son of Noah. The Eve–Pandora parallel was
often noted.
724–5. See Ps. 74:16: “The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou hast prepared the light and the sun.”
736–8 Rites. Like many Puritans, Milton objected to set forms of prayer, so Adam and Eve pray spontaneously, therefore sincerely, though paradoxically they pray together, “unanimous.”

Book 4

745

750

755

760

765

770

Whatever Hypocrites austerely talk
Of puritie and place and innocence,
Defaming as impure what God declares
Pure, and commands to som, leaves free to all.
Our Maker bids increase, who bids abstain
But our destroyer, foe to God and Man?
Haile wedded Love, mysterious Law, true source
Of human ofspring, sole proprietie,°
In Paradise of all things common else.
By thee adulterous lust was driv’n from men
Among the bestial herds to raunge, by thee
Founded in Reason, Loyal, Just, and Pure,
Relations dear, and all the Charities°
Of Father, Son, and Brother first were known.
Farr be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place,
Perpetual Fountain of Domestic sweets,
Whose bed is undefil’d and chaste pronounc’t,
Present, or past, as Saints and Patriarchs us’d.
Here Love his golden shafts imploies, here lights
His constant Lamp, and waves his purple wings,
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
Of Harlots, loveless, joyless, unindeard,°
Casual fruition, nor in Court Amours
Mixt Dance, or wanton Mask, or Midnight Bal,
Or Serenate, which the starv’d Lover sings
To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain.
These lulld by Nightingales imbraceing slept,

113

only exclusive possession

loves, affections

lacking affection

744–9. 1 Tim. 4:1–3, applied by Protestants to the Roman Church, warns that “in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith . . . Forbidding to marry.” Cf. 1 Cor. 7:9, “ But if they cannot contain, let them marry:
for it is better to marry than to burn,” and Gen. 1:28: “And God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.”
750–75. An embedded epithalamium (wedding song originally sung outside the bridal chamber). The Bard
takes on the role of celebrator singing outside Adam and Eve’s bower as they prepare for sex and sleep,
though this couple’s wedding night took place at some earlier time.
761. Cf. Heb. 13:4: “Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed undefiled.”
762 Saints and Patriarchs. Many of them were married.
763. The “golden shafts” (arrows) of Cupid (Love) were said to produce true love; his lead-tipped arrows, hate.
768 Mixt Dance. Men and women dancing together.
wanton Mask. The ostentatious entertainments
of the Stuart court.
769–70 Serenate. Milton imagines a Petrarchan serenade (night song) by a lover perishing from the cold
(“starv’d”) his “proud” lady exudes by her refusals of love (a typical Petrarchan conceit).

114

775

780

785

790

795

800
 
And on thir naked limbs the flourie roof
Showrd Roses, which the Morn repair’d.° Sleep on
Blest pair; and O yet happiest if ye seek
No happier state, and know to know no more.
Now had night measur’d with her shaddowie Cone
Half way up Hill this vast Sublunar Vault,
And from thir Ivorie Port the Cherubim
Forth issuing at th’ accustomd hour stood armd
To thir night watches in warlike Parade,
When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake.
Uzziel, half these draw off, and coast° the South
With strictest watch; these other wheel° the North,
Our circuit meets full West. As flame they part
Half wheeling to the Shield,° half to the Spear.°
From these, two strong and suttle Spirits he calld
That neer him stood, and gave them thus in charge.
Ithuriel and Zephon, with wingd speed
Search through this Garden, leave unsearcht no nook,
But chiefly where those two fair Creatures Lodge,
Now laid perhaps asleep secure of harme.
This Eevning from the Sun’s decline arriv’d
Who° tells of som infernal Spirit seen
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escap’d
The barrs of Hell, on errand bad no doubt:
Such where ye find, seise fast, and hither bring.
So saying, on he led his radiant Files,
Daz’ling the Moon; these to the Bower direct
In search of whom they sought: him there they found
Squat like a Toad, close at the eare of Eve;
Assaying by his Devilish art to reach
The Organs of her Fancie, and with them forge
Illusions as he list,° Phantasms and Dreams,
Or if, inspiring° venom, he might taint

replaced

traverse
turn, as around a pivot
left / right

one who

pleased
breathing into (her)

776–7. The conical shadow cast by the earth has moved “Half way up Hill,” i.e., halfway between the horizon and the zenith, so it is 9 p.m.
778 Ivorie Port. The source of false dreams in Homer (Odyssey 6.562 – 5), dreams whose message is never
accomplished.
782 Uzziel. Hebrew, “Strength of God.” Cabbalistic tradition identified him as one of the seven angels before
God’s throne.
788 Ithuriel. Hebrew, “Discovery of God.”
Zephon. Hebrew, “ Look-out.” There is no biblical account
of angels so named.
802 Organs. Instruments.
Fancie. The faculty that forms mental images.

Book 4

115

805 Th’ animal Spirits that from pure blood arise

810

815

820

825

830

835

840

Like gentle breaths from Rivers pure, thence raise
At least distemperd,° discontented thoughts,
Vaine hopes, vaine aimes, inordinate desires
Blown up with high conceits° ingendring pride.
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his Spear
Touch’d lightly; for no falshood can endure
Touch of Celestial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeness: up he starts
Discoverd and surpriz’d. As when a spark
Lights° on a heap of nitrous Powder,° laid
Fit for the Tun° som Magazin° to store
Against° a rumord Warr, the Smuttie° graine
With sudden blaze diffus’d, inflames the Aire:
So started up in his own shape the Fiend.
Back stept those two fair Angels half amaz’d
So sudden to behold the grieslie King;
Yet thus, unmovd with fear, accost him soon.
Which of those rebell Spirits adjudg’d to Hell
Com’st thou, escap’d thy prison, and transform’d,
Why satst thou like an enemie in waite
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?
Know ye not then said Satan, fill’d with scorn,
Know ye not mee? ye knew me once no mate°
For you, there sitting where ye durst not soare;
Not to know mee argues your selves unknown,
The lowest of your throng; or if ye know,
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
Your message, like to end as much in vain?
To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn.
Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,
Or undiminisht brightness, to be known
As when thou stoodst in Heav’n upright and pure;
That Glorie then, when thou no more wast good,
Departed from thee, and thou resembl’st now
Thy sin and place of doom obscure° and foule.
But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account

disordered, troubled
notions

alights, kindles / gunpowder
barrel / storehouse for explosives
in preparation for / black

equal

dark, lowly, unknown

805 animal Spirits. The highest of the three kinds of fine vapors produced in the human body: ascending
from the blood to the brain, they convey sense data from past experiences, and issue through nerves to
impart motion to the body.
812 Celestial temper. Ithuriel’s spear “tempered” (prepared ) in celestial ether.

116

845

850

855

860

865

870

875

880
 
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep
This place inviolable, and these from harm.
So spake the Cherube, and his grave rebuke
Severe in youthful beautie, added grace
Invincible: abasht the Devil stood,
And felt how awful° goodness is, and saw
Vertue in her shape how lovly, saw, and pin’d°
His loss; but chiefly to find here observd
His lustre visibly impar’d; yet seemd
Undaunted. If I must contend, said he,
Best with the best, the Sender not the sent,
Or all at once; more glorie will be wonn,
Or less be lost. Thy fear, said Zephon bold,
Will save us trial what the least can doe
Single° against thee wicked, and thence weak.
The Fiend repli’d not, overcome with rage;
But like a proud Steed reind, went hautie on,
Chaumping his iron curb: to strive or flie
He held it vain; awe from above had quelld
His heart, not else dismai’d. Now drew they nigh
The western Point, where those half-rounding guards
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joind
Awaiting next command. To whom thir Chief
Gabriel from the Front thus calld aloud.
O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet
Hasting this way, and now by glimps discerne
Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade,°
And with them comes a third of Regal port,°
But faded splendor wan; who by his gate
And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell,
Not likely to part hence without contest;
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours.°
He scarce had ended, when those two approachd
And brief related whom they brought, where found,
How busied, in what form and posture coucht.
To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake.
Why hast thou, Satan, broke the bounds prescrib’d
To thy transgressions, and disturbd the charge°
Of others, who approve not to transgress
By thy example, but have power and right
862 half-rounding. Completing the circle of the garden, half having swung left, half right.

awe-inspiring
mourned

in single combat

trees
bearing

scowls

responsibility

Book 4

885

890

895

900

905

910

915

To question thy bold entrance on this place;
Imploi’d it seems to violate sleep, and those
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss?
To whom thus Satan with contemptuous brow.
Gabriel, thou hadst in Heav’n th’ esteem° of wise,
And such I held thee; but this question askt
Puts me in doubt. Lives ther who loves his pain?
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,
Though thither doomd? Thou wouldst thy self, no doubt,
And boldly venture to whatever place
Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change
Torment with ease, and soonest recompence°
Dole° with delight, which in this place I sought;
To thee no reason; who knowst only good,
But evil hast not tri’d: and wilt object
His will who bound us? let him surer barr
His Iron Gates, if he intends our stay
In that dark durance:° thus much what was askt.
The rest is true, they found me where they say;
But that implies not violence or harme.
Thus he in scorn. The warlike Angel mov’d,
Disdainfully half smiling thus repli’d.
O loss of one in Heav’n to judge of wise,
Since Satan fell, whom follie overthrew,
And now returns him from his prison scap’t,
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise
Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither
Unlicenc’t from his bounds in Hell prescrib’d;
So wise he judges it to fly from pain
However,° and to scape his punishment.
So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrauth,
Which thou incurr’st by flying, meet thy flight
Seavenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell,
Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain
Can equal anger infinite provok’t.
But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee
Came not all Hell broke loose? is pain to them
Less pain, less to be fled, or thou then they

117

reputation

replace
pain, grief

imprisonment

in any way possible

896 object. Put forward as an objection.
904–5 O loss. Irony, i.e., O what a loss to Heaven to lose such a judge of wisdom as Satan, whose folly led
to his downfall.

118
 
920 Less hardie to endure? courageous Chief,

925

930

935

940

945

950

955

The first in flight from pain, had’st thou alleg’d
To thy deserted host this cause of flight,
Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive.
To which the Fiend thus answerd frowning stern.
Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,
Insulting Angel, well thou knowst I stood°
Thy fiercest, when in Battel to thy aide
The blasting volied Thunder made all speed
And seconded thy else not dreaded Spear.
But still thy words at random,° as before,
Argue thy inexperience what behooves
From° hard assaies° and ill successes past
A faithful Leader, not to hazard all
Through wayes of danger by himself untri’d,
I therefore, I alone first undertook
To wing the desolate Abyss, and spie
This new created World, whereof in Hell
Fame° is not silent, here in hope to find
Better abode, and my afflicted Powers
To settle here on Earth, or in mid Aire;
Though for possession put° to try once more
What thou and thy gay° Legions dare against;
Whose easier business were to serve thir Lord
High up in Heav’n, with songs to hymne his Throne,
And practis’d distances to cringe, not fight.
To whom the warriour Angel, soon repli’d.
To say and strait unsay, pretending first
Wise to flie pain, professing next the Spie,
Argues no Leader but a lyar trac’t,°
Satan, and couldst thou faithful add? O name,
O sacred name of faithfulness profan’d!
Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew?
Armie of Fiends, fit body to fit head;
Was this your discipline and faith ingag’d,
Your military obedience, to dissolve
Allegeance to th’ acknowledg’d Power supream?
And thou sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem

withstood, endured

wide of the mark
after / attacks, attempts

rumor

forced
ostentatious

found out

940 mid Aire. Satan will become “prince of the power of the air” (Eph. 2:2).
945 cringe. Satan contemptuously parallels the angels’ courtly deference, keeping various “distances” before
God’s throne, with keeping a safe distance from battle.

Book 4

960

965

970

975

980

985

990

Patron° of liberty, who more then thou
Once fawn’d, and cring’d, and servilly ador’d
Heav’ns awful Monarch? wherefore but in hope
To dispossess him, and thy self to reigne?
But mark what I arreede° thee now, avant;°
Flie thither whence thou fledst: if from this houre
Within these hallowd limits thou appeer,
Back to th’ infernal pit I drag thee chaind,
And Seale thee so, as henceforth not to scorne
The facil° gates of hell too slightly barrd.
So threatn’d hee, but Satan to no threats
Gave heed, but waxing° more in rage repli’d.
Then when I am thy captive talk of chaines,
Proud limitarie Cherube, but ere then
Farr heavier load thy self expect to feel
From my prevailing arme, though Heavens King
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy Compeers,
Us’d to the yoak, draw’st his triumphant wheels
In progress° through the rode of Heav’n Star-pav’d.
While thus he spake, th’ Angelic Squadron bright
Turnd fierie red, sharpning in mooned hornes°
Thir Phalanx, and began to hemm him round
With ported Spears, as thick as when a field
Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends
Her bearded Grove of ears, which way the wind
Swayes them; the careful° Plowman doubting stands
Least on the threshing floore his hopeful sheaves
Prove chaff. On th’ other side Satan allarm’d°
Collecting all his might dilated stood,
Like Teneriff or Atlas unremov’d:
His stature reacht the Skie, and on his Crest
Sat horror Plum’d; nor wanted in his graspe
What seemd both Spear and Shield: now dreadful deeds
Might have ensu’d, nor onely Paradise
In this commotion, but the Starrie Cope°

958–60. See 5.617, 660–71, for Satan’s behavior on the day of the Son’s exaltation.
971 limitarie. Frontier guard, also one of limited authority.
980 ported Spears. Held slantways in front.
981 Ceres. Roman goddess of agriculture, here a metonymy for grain.
987 Teneriff. A mountain in the Canary Islands.
Atlas. a mountain in Morocco.
unremov’d. immovable.
990–7. Cf. 6.668–77.

119
advocate

advise / be gone

easily opened
growing

a state procession
crescent formation

anxious
called to arms

vault

120

995

1000

1005

1010

1015
 
Of Heav’n perhaps, or all the Elements
At least had gon to rack, disturbd and torne
With violence of this conflict, had not soon
Th’ Eternal to prevent such horrid fray
Hung forth in Heav’n his golden Scales, yet seen
Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion signe,
Wherein all things created first he weighd,
The pendulous round Earth with balanc’t Aire
In counterpoise, now ponders° all events,
Battels and Realms: in these he put two weights
The sequel each of parting and of fight;
The latter quick up flew, and kickt the beam;
Which Gabriel spying, thus bespake the Fiend.
Satan, I know thy strength, and thou know’st mine,
Neither our own but giv’n; what follie then
To boast what Arms can doe, since thine no more
Then Heav’n permits, nor mine, though doubld now
To trample thee as mire: for proof look up,
And read thy Lot in yon celestial Sign
Where thou art weigh’d, and shown how light, how weak,
If thou resist. The Fiend lookt up and knew
His mounted scale aloft: nor more; but fled
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.

weighs, considers

The End of the Fourth Book.

997–8 golden Scales. The constellation Libra (the Scales) is between Virgo (identified with “Astraea,” goddess of Justice, who fled the earth at the end of the Golden Age) and Scorpio.
1002–3. In several classical epic similes the fates of opposing heroes are weighed in scales by the gods:
cf. Iliad 8.69–72, where the destiny of the Greeks is weighed against that of the Trojans, and Virgil, Aeneid
12.725–7, where Aeneas’ fate is weighed against that of Turnus. See also Isa. 40:12: God “hath measured
the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust
of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance.”
1004 kickt the beam. i.e., of the scales: the battle desired by Satan proved lighter.
1012. See Dan. 5:27, God’s warning to King Belshazzar, “Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found
wanting.”

Figure 5

Illustration to Book 5, 1688 ( John Baptista Medina)

BOOK 5
THE ARGUMENT
Morning approach’t, Eve relates to Adam her troublesome dream; he likes it not, yet
comforts her: They come forth to thir day labours: Thir Morning Hymn at the Door
of thir Bower. God to render Man inexcusable sends Raphael to admonish him of his
obedience, of his free estate, of his enemy near at hand; who he is, and why his enemy,
5 and whatever else may avail Adam to know. Raphael comes down to Paradise, his
appearance describ’d, his coming discern’d by Adam afar off sitting at the door of his
Bower; he goes out to meet him, brings him to his lodge, entertains him with the
choycest fruits of Paradise got together by Eve; thir discourse at Table: Raphael performs his message, minds Adam of his state and of his enemy; relates at Adams request
10 who that enemy is, and how he came to be so, beginning from his first revolt in
Heaven, and the occasion thereof; how he drew his Legions after him to the parts
of the North, and there incited them to rebel with him, perswading all but only Abdiel
a Seraph, who in Argument diswades and opposes him, then forsakes him.

Now Morn her rosie steps in th’ Eastern Clime
Advancing, sow’d the earth with Orient° Pearle,
When Adam wak’t, so customd, for his sleep
Was Aerie light from pure digestion bred,
5 And temperat vapors bland,° which th’ only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora’s fan,
Lightly dispers’d, and the shrill Matin° Song
Of Birds on every bough; so much the more
His wonder was to find unwak’nd Eve
10 With Tresses discompos’d, and glowing Cheek,
As through unquiet rest: he on his side
Leaning half-rais’d, with looks of cordial° Love
Hung over her enamour’d, and beheld
Beautie, which whether waking or asleep,
15 Shot forth peculiar Graces;° then with voice
Milde, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,

lustrous, eastern

gentle, balmy
morning

heartfelt

her own charms

13 diswades. To advise or exhort (a person) against.
1–2. Cf. the Homeric descriptive formula, “rosy-fingered dawn” (Iliad 1.477).
3–4. Cf. 9.1049–52.
6. Rustling leaves and foaming streams (“fuming rills”) are stirred by the morning breezes (“fan”) of “Aurora,”
goddess of the dawn.
16 Zephyrus. God of the west wind.
Flora. Goddess of flowers. They were consorts in Ovid, Fasti 5.197–207.
Cf. Botticelli, Primavera.

Book 5

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Her hand soft touching, whisperd thus. Awake
My fairest, my espous’d, my latest found,
Heav’ns last best gift, my ever new delight,
Awake, the morning shines, and the fresh field
Calls us, we lose the prime,° to mark how spring
Our tended Plants, how blows° the Citron Grove,
What drops the Myrrhe, and what the balmie Reed,°
How Nature paints her colours, how the Bee
Sits on the Bloom extracting liquid sweet.
Such whispering wak’d her, but with startl’d eye
On Adam, whom imbracing, thus she spake.
O Sole° in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My Glorie, my Perfection, glad I see
Thy face, and Morn return’d, for I this Night,
Such night till this I never pass’d, have dream’d,
If dream’d, not as I oft am wont,° of thee,
Works of day pass’t, or morrows next designe,
But of offence and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irksom night; methought
Close at mine ear one call’d me forth to walk
With gentle voice, I thought it thine; it said,
Why sleepst thou Eve? now is the pleasant time,
The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
To the night-warbling Bird,° that now awake
Tunes sweetest his love-labor’d song; now reignes
Full Orb’d the Moon, and with more pleasing light
Shadowie sets off the face of things; in vain,
If none regard; Heav’n wakes with all his eyes,°
Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire,
In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
Attracted by thy beauty still° to gaze.
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;
To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I pass’d through ways
That brought me on a sudden to the Tree
Of interdicted Knowledge: fair it seem’d,

123

first hour of day, 6 a.m.
blooms
tree yielding balm

only one

accustomed

the nightingale

stars

continually

17–25. Adam’s morning love song (aubade) works variations on Song of Solomon 2:10 –12: “Rise up, my love,
my fair one, and come away . . . The flowers appear on the earth; the time of the singing of birds is come.”
Compare Satan’s serenade at 5.38–47.
41 love-labor’d. Produced by love and for love.
45–90. Cf. the temptation of Eve at 9.532–48, 568–612, 679 –732.

124

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90
 
Much fairer to my Fancie then by day:
And as I wondring lookt, beside it stood
One shap’d and wing’d like one of those from Heav’n
By us oft seen; his dewie locks distill’d
Ambrosia;° on that Tree he also gaz’d;
And O fair Plant, said he, with fruit surcharg’d,°
Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet,
Nor God,° nor Man; is Knowledge so despis’d?
Or envie, or what reserve° forbids to taste?
Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
Longer thy offerd good, why else set here?
This said he paus’d not, but with ventrous Arme
He pluckt, he tasted; mee damp horror chil’d
At such bold words voucht° with a deed so bold:
But he thus overjoy’d, O Fruit Divine,
Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropt,
Forbidd’n here, it seems, as onely fit
For God’s, yet able to make Gods of Men:
And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more
Communicated, more abundant growes,
The Author not impair’d,° but honourd more?
Here, happie Creature, fair Angelic Eve,
Partake thou also; happie though thou art,
Happier thou mayst be, worthier canst not be:
Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confind,
But somtimes in the Air, as wee, somtimes
Ascend to Heav’n, by merit thine, and see
What life the Gods live there, and such live thou.
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
Which he had pluckt; the pleasant savourie° smell
So quick’nd appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the Clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The Earth outstretcht immense, a prospect wide
And various: wondring at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; suddenly
My Guide was gon, and I, me thought, sunk down,
And fell asleep; but O how glad I wak’d
To find this but a dream! Thus Eve her Night
Related, and thus Adam answerd sad.°

heavenly perfume
overloaded
angel
restriction

backed

injured, diminished

appetizing, fragrant

gravely, soberly

Book 5
95

100

105

110

115

120

125

Best Image of my self and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
Affects me equally; nor can I like
This uncouth° dream, of evil sprung I fear;
Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
Created pure. But know that in the Soule
Are many lesser Faculties that serve
Reason as chief; among these Fansie° next
Her office holds; of all external things,
Which the five watchful Senses represent,°
She forms Imaginations,° Aerie shapes,
Which Reason joyning or disjoyning, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private Cell° when Nature rests.
Oft in her absence mimic Fansie wakes
To imitate her; but misjoyning shapes,
Wilde work produces oft, and most in dreams,
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.°
Som such resemblances methinks I find
Of our last Eevnings talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition strange; yet be not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come and go, so unapprov’d,° and leave
No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou didst abhorr to dream,
Waking thou never wilt consent to do.
Be not disheart’nd then, nor cloud those looks
That wont° to be more chearful and serene
Then when fair Morning first smiles on the World,
And let us to our fresh imployments rise
Among the Groves, the Fountains, and the Flours
That open now thir choicest bosom’d° smells
Reservd from night, and kept for thee in store.
So cheard he his fair Spouse, and she was cheard,

125

strange, unpleasant

fancy, imagination
bring into the mind
images

compartment of the brain

recent

not sanctioned, not acted on

are accustomed

enclosed

100–13. Adam’s explanation of the dream summarizes the orthodox faculty psychology and dream theory
of Milton’s time, a knowledge unfallen man possesses. “Fansie” (fancy) forms images of the “external things”
the “five watchful Senses” present; “Reason” connects or separates those images, producing “knowledge
or opinion.” In sleep, reason withdraws and fancy takes over, “misjoyning shapes” and mismatching “words
and deeds” from past experience, in “dreams.”
117 God. Probably angel, as elsewhere, but perhaps also God, whose omniscience includes knowledge of evil.

126
 
130 But silently a gentle tear let fall

135

140

145

150

155

160

165

From either eye, and wip’d them with her haire;
Two other precious drops that ready stood,
Each in thir Chrystal sluce, hee ere they fell
Kiss’d as the gracious signs of sweet remorse
And pious° awe, that feard to have offended.
So all was cleard, and to the Field they haste.
But first from under shadie arborous roof,°
Soon as they forth were come to open sight
Of day-spring,° and the Sun, who scarce up risen
With wheels yet hov’ring o’re the Ocean brim,
Shot paralel to the earth his dewie ray,
Discovering° in wide Lantskip° all the East
Of Paradise and Edens happie Plains,
Lowly they bow’d adoring, and began
Thir Orisons,° each Morning duly paid
In various style, for neither various style
Nor holy rapture wanted° they to praise
Thir Maker, in fit strains pronounc’t or sung
Unmeditated, such prompt eloquence
Flowd from thir lips, in Prose or numerous° Verse,
More tuneable° then needed Lute or Harp
To add more sweetness, and they thus began.
These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almightie, thine this universal Frame,°
Thus wondrous fair; thy self how wondrous then!
Unspeakable,° who sitst above these Heavens
To us invisible or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works, yet these declare°
Thy goodness beyond thought, and Power Divine:
Speak yee who best can tell, ye Sons of light,
Angels, for yee behold him, and with songs
And choral symphonies, Day without Night,
Circle his Throne rejoycing, yee in Heav’n,
On Earth joyn all ye Creatures to extoll
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.

devout, dutiful
canopy of trees
daybreak

revealing / landscape

prayers
lacked

rhythmic
melodious

structure, the universe
inexpressible
show forth

140 wheels. Helios, or Sol, god of the sun, was imagined to drive the chariot of the sun from east to west.
146–52 various style. Adam and Eve employ many forms of speech and song that harmonize together in
“fit strains” but are at the same time spontaneous and ecstatic, expressing “holy rapture.” Milton, like other
Puritans, disapproved of set liturgical forms.
153–208. Their morning hymn works variations on Psalms 148, 104, and 19, as well as the canticle Benedicite.

Book 5

170

175

180

185

190

195

Fairest of Starrs, last in the train of Night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crownst the smiling Morn
With thy bright Circlet, praise him in thy Spheare
While day arises, that sweet hour of Prime.
Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soule,
Acknowledge him thy Greater, sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climb’st,
And when high Noon hast gaind, and when thou fallst.
Moon, that now meetst the orient Sun, now fli’st
With the fixt Starrs, fixt in thir Orb that flies,
And yee five other wandring Fires that move
In mystic Dance not without Song, resound
His praise, who out of Darkness call’d up Light.
Aire, and ye Elements the eldest birth
Of Natures Womb, that in quaternion° run
Perpetual Circle, multiform; and mix
And nourish all things, let your ceasless change
Varie to our great Maker still° new praise.
Ye Mists and Exhalations that now rise
From Hill or steaming Lake, duskie or grey,
Till the Sun paint your fleecie skirts with Gold,
In honour to the Worlds great Author rise,
Whether to deck with Clouds th’ uncolourd skie,
Or wet the thirstie Earth with falling showers,
Rising or falling still advance his praise.
His praise ye Winds, that from four Quarters blow,
Breathe soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines,
With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave.
Fountains and yee, that warble, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise.
Joyn voices all ye living Souls; ye Birds,
That singing up to Heaven Gate ascend,
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise;

127

group of four

continually

166–8. Venus, the morning star, is the last star to disappear at dawn and (as Hesperus) the first to appear in
the evening.
176–8 Orb that flies. The orb of the “fixt Starrs” revolves, though the stars remain “fixt” in place.
five other wandring Fires. The other planets besides the moon and sun, already mentioned, are Mercury,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and Venus (or earth), which change positions. These motions produce the music of
the spheres, audible to unfallen humans.
180–3. The four elements – earth, water, air, fire – are the “eldest birth” of nature, and “nourish” all things
by their “ceasless change” and orderly interactions.

128
 
200 Yee that in Waters glide, and yee that walk

205

210

215

220

225

230

The Earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep;
Witness if I be silent, Morn or Eeven,
To Hill, or Valley, Fountain, or fresh shade
Made vocal by my Song, and taught his praise.
Hail universal Lord, be bounteous still°
To give us onely good; and if the night
Have gathered aught of evil or conceald,
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.
So pray’d they innocent, and to thir thoughts
Firm peace recoverd soon and wonted calm.
On to thir mornings rural work they haste
Among sweet dewes and flours; where any row
Of Fruit-trees overwoodie° reachd too farr
Thir pamperd° boughes, and needed hands to check
Fruitless imbraces: or they led the Vine
To wed her Elm; she spous’d about him twines
Her marriageable arms, and with her brings
Her dowr th’ adopted Clusters, to adorn
His barren leaves. Them thus imploid beheld
With pittie Heav’ns high King, and to him call’d
Raphael, the sociable Spirit, that deign’d
To travel with Tobias, and secur’d
His marriage with the seaventimes-wedded Maid.
Raphael, said hee, thou hear’st what stir on Earth
Satan from Hell scap’t through the darksom Gulf
Hath raisd in Paradise, and how disturbd
This night the human pair, how he designes
In them at once to ruin all mankind.
Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend
Converse with Adam, in what Bowre or shade
Thou find’st him from the heat of Noon retir’d,
To respit his day-labour with repast,
Or with repose; and such discourse bring on,
As may advise him of his happie state,

always

too bushy
not restrained

215–19. A familiar emblem of matrimony, the “Elm,” symbolizing masculine strength, and the “Vine,” feminine fruitfulness, softness, and sweetness. But “adopted Clusters” seems to carry matriarchal implications.
221–3 Raphael. In Hebrew, “Health of God.” He was the advisor of “Tobias” in winning his wife (see 4.168–71
and note), and told him how to cure Tobit’s blindness (Apocrypha: Tobit 11:7–14). In cabbalism he is one
of the four angels (with Gabriel, Michael, and Uriel) in charge of the four corners of the earth.
229–30. God spoke to Moses, “face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend” (Exod. 33:11).

Book 5

129

235 Happiness in his power left free to will,

240

245

250

255

260

265

Left to his own free Will, his Will though free,
Yet mutable; whence warne him to beware
He swerve not too secure:° tell him withall
His danger, and from whom, what enemie
Late falln himself from Heav’n, is plotting now
The fall of others from like state of bliss;
By violence, no, for that shall be withstood,
But by deceit and lies; this let him know,
Least wilfully transgressing he pretend°
Surprisal, unadmonisht, unforewarnd.
So spake th’ Eternal Father, and fulfilld
All Justice: nor delaid the winged Saint°
After his charge receivd; but from among
Thousand Celestial Ardors, where he stood
Vaild with his gorgeous wings, up springing light
Flew through the midst of Heav’n; th’ angelic Quires
On each hand parting, to his speed gave way
Through all th’ Empyreal° road; till at the Gate
Of Heav’n arriv’d, the gate self-opend wide
On golden Hinges turning, as by work
Divine the sov’ran Architect had fram’d.
From hence, no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight,
Starr interpos’d, however small he sees,
Not unconform to other shining Globes,
Earth and the Gard’n of God, with Cedars crownd
Above all Hills. As when by night the Glass°
Of Galileo, less assur’d, observes
Imagind Lands and Regions in the Moon:
Or Pilot from amidst the Cyclades
Delos or Samos first appeering kenns°
A cloudy spot. Down thither prone° in flight
He speeds, and through the vast Ethereal Skie
Sailes between worlds and worlds, with steddie wing

overconfident

plead

angel

heavenly

telescope

discerns
bent forward

249 Ardors. Spirits (angels) burning in love, from the Latin ardere, “to burn.”
261–3 Galileo. Cf. 1.288–91.
264–6 Cyclades. A circular group of islands in the south Aegean sea. The two islands a “Pilot” might see as
“spots” from within the archipelago are “Delos” (the traditional center but famous for having floated adrift)
and “Samos,” outside the group, off the coast of Asia Minor.
266–76. Raphael’s descent is an epic topos, modeled on the descents of Virgil’s Mercury (Aeneid 4.238 – 58)
and Tasso’s Michael (Gerusalemme Liberata 9.60–2).

130

270

275

280

285

290

295
 
Now on the polar windes, then with quick Fann°
Winnows the buxom° Air; till within soare°
Of Towring Eagles, to all the Fowles he seems
A Phænix, gaz’d by all, as that sole Bird
When to enshrine his reliques in the Sun’s
Bright Temple, to Ægyptian Theb’s he flies.
At once on th’ Eastern cliff of Paradise
He lights, and to his proper shape returns
A Seraph wingd; six wings he wore, to shade
His lineaments° Divine; the pair that clad
Each shoulder broad, came mantling° o’re his brest
With regal Ornament; the middle pair
Girt like a Starrie Zone° his waste, and round
Skirted his loines and thighes with downie Gold
And colours dipt in Heav’n; the third his feet
Shaddowd from either heele with featherd maile°
Skie-tinctur’d grain.° Like Maia’s son he stood,
And shook his Plumes, that Heav’nly fragrance filld
The circuit wide. Strait knew him all the Bands
Of Angels under watch; and to his state,°
And to his message high in honour rise;
For on som message high they guessd him bound.
Thir glittering Tents he passd, and now is come
Into the blissful field, through Groves of Myrrhe,
And flouring Odours, Cassia, Nard, and Balme;
A Wilderness of sweets; for Nature here
Wantond° as in her prime, and plaid° at will
Her Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more sweet,
Wilde above Rule or Art; enormous° bliss.
Him through the spicie Forrest onward com
Adam discernd, as in the dore he sat

flutter
yielding / highest flight

parts of the body
covering
belt

plumage like armor
dye

rank

revelled / sported
immense, beyond rule

272 Phœnix. A mythical, unique bird (“sole”) who lived five hundred years, was consumed by fire, and was
reborn from the ashes which it then carried to the Temple of the Sun at Heliopolis in Egypt (“Ægyptian
Theb’s”).
276–85 proper shape. Modeled on the description of the Seraphim in Isa. 6:2; “each one had six wings; with
twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.”
285 Maia’s son. Mercury, messenger of the gods.
293 Cassia. A cinnamon.
Nard. Spikenard.
Balme. Balsam. All were used to make perfumed
ointments.
299–300. Raphael’s visit to Adam is modeled on Abraham’s entertainment of three angels: “[Abraham] sat
in the tent door in the heat of the day; And he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by
him.” He and his wife Sarah prepared a meal for the angels, but most Christian commentators agreed that
these angels, being spirits, ate only in show (Gen. 18:1– 8).

Book 5

131

300 Of his coole Bowre, while now the mounted Sun

305

310

315

320

325

330

335

Shot down direct his fervid Raies to warme
Earths inmost womb, more warmth then Adam needs;
And Eve within, due° at her hour prepar’d
For dinner savourie fruits, of taste to please
True appetite, and not disrelish thirst
Of nectarous draughts between, from milkie stream,
Berrie or Grape: to whom thus Adam call’d.
Haste hither Eve, and worth thy sight behold
Eastward among those Trees, what glorious shape
Comes this way moving; seems another Morn
Ris’n on mid-noon; som great behest from Heav’n
To us perhaps he brings, and will voutsafe°
This day to be our Guest. But goe with speed,
And what thy stores contain, bring forth and poure
Abundance, fit to honour and receive
Our Heav’nly stranger; well we may afford
Our givers thir own gifts, and large bestow
From large bestowd, where Nature multiplies
Her fertil growth, and by disburd’ning grows
More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare.
To whom thus Eve. Adam, earths hallowd mould,°
Of God inspir’d,° small store will serve, where store,
All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk;
Save what by frugal storing firmness gains
To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes:
But I will haste and from each bough and break,
Each Plant and juiciest Gourd° will pluck such choice
To entertain our Angel guest, as hee
Beholding shall confess that here on Earth
God hath dispenst his bounties as in Heav’n.
So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste
She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent
What choice to chuse for delicacie best,
What order, so contriv’d as not to mix
Tastes, not well joynd, inelegant, but bring
Taste after taste upheld° with kindliest° change,

fittingly

grant

pattern, model
given breath of life

type of melon

sustained / most natural

304–7. Eve prepared sweet drinks (“nectarous draughts”) from juices (“milkie stream”) of “Berrie or Grape,”
to be enjoyed “between” courses of “savourie fruits.”
322 small store. Reserve.
store. Abundance.

132

340

345

350

355

360

365

370
 
Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk
Whatever Earth all-bearing Mother yields
In India° East or West, or middle shoare
In Pontus or the Punic Coast, or where
Alcinous reign’d, fruit of all kindes, in coate,
Rough, or smooth rin’d, or bearded husk, or shell
She gathers, Tribute large, and on the board
Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the Grape
She crushes, inoffensive moust, and meathes
From many a berrie, and from sweet kernels prest
She tempers° dulcet° creams, nor these to hold
Wants° her fit vessels pure, then strews the ground
With Rose and Odours from the shrub unfum’d.
Mean while our Primitive° great Sire, to meet
His god-like Guest, walks forth, without more train°
Accompani’d then with his own compleat
Perfections, in himself was all his state,°
More solemn then the tedious pomp that waits
On Princes, when thir rich Retinue long
Of Horses led, and Grooms besmeard with Gold
Dazles the croud, and sets them all agape.
Neerer his presence Adam though not awd,
Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek,
As to a superior Nature, bowing low,
Thus said. Native of Heav’n, for other place
None can then Heav’n such glorious shape contain;
Since by descending from the Thrones above,
Those happie places thou hast deignd a while
To want,° and honour these, voutsafe with us
Two onely, who yet by sov’ran gift possess
This spacious ground, in yonder shadie Bowre
To rest, and what the Garden choicest bears
To sit and taste, till this meridian° heat
Be over, and the Sun more coole decline.

Indies

blends / sweet
lacks
original
attendants
stateliness, rank

be parted from

noontime

339–41 middle shoare. “Pontus,” the south coast of the Black Sea, was famous for nuts and fruits; the “Punic”
(Carthaginian) coast of North Africa on the Mediterranean, was famous for figs; the garden of Alcinous
in the mythical island of Scheria is described in Odyssey 7.113 – 28 as perpetually fruitful.
345 inoffensive moust. Unfermented grape juice.
meathes. Meads, honey-sweetened drinks.
349 unfum’d. Naturally scented, not needing to be burned as incense.
354–7 tedious pomp. The showy display of kings like Charles II whose pageantry “Dazles the croud” but
falls far short of the “solemn” natural majesty of Adam.

Book 5

375

380

385

390

395

400

Whom thus the Angelic Vertue answerd milde.
Adam, I therefore came, nor art thou such
Created, or such place hast here to dwell,
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heav’n
To visit thee; lead on then where thy Bowre
Oreshades; for these mid-hours, till Eevning rise
I have at will. So to the Silvan Lodge
They came, that like Pomona’s Arbour smil’d
With flourets deck’t° and fragrant smells; but Eve
Undeckt, save with her self more lovely fair
Then Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feign’d
Of three that in Mount Ida naked strove,
Stood to entertain her guest from Heav’n; no vaile
Shee needed, Vertue-proof,° no thought infirme
Alterd her cheek. On whom the Angel Haile
Bestowd, the holy salutation us’d
Long after to blest Marie, second Eve.
Haile Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful Womb
Shall fill the World more numerous with thy Sons
Then with these various fruits the Trees of God
Have heap’d this Table. Rais’d of grassie terf
Thir Table was, and mossie seats had round,
And on her ample Square from side to side
All Autumn pil’d, though Spring and Autumn here
Danc’d hand in hand. A while discourse they hold;
No fear lest Dinner coole; when thus began
Our Authour.° Heav’nly stranger, please to taste
These bounties which our Nourisher, from whom
All perfet good unmeasur’d out, descends,
To us for food and for delight hath caus’d

133

covered

armored in virtue

originator, ancestor

371 Vertue. One of the traditional nine orders of angels in the scheme of Dionysius the Areopagite:
Seraphim, Cherubim, Thrones, Dominions, Virtues, Powers, Principalities, Archangels, Angels. Milton uses
these titles freely, in the Protestant manner, without regard to this hierarchical order. Some angels are
given more than one title: Raphael is called “Vertue” here, “Seraph” at line 277, and “Arch-Angel” at 7.41.
378 Pomona. Roman goddess of fruit trees.
381–2 three. On “Mount Ida,” Venus, Juno, and Minerva “naked strove” for the apple of discord inscribed
“for the fairest.” Paris awarded the prize to Aphrodite (“the fairest Goddess”) in return for the love of
Helen, which led to her rape and the Trojan War.
385–8. Cf. the angel’s words to Mary announcing that she would bear a son, Jesus (Luke 1:28): “Hail, thou
that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.” For Mary as “second Eve”
see PL 10.183.
398–400 our Nourisher. Cf. Jas. 1:17, “Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh
down from the Father of lights.”

134

405

410

415

420

425
 
The Earth to yield; unsavourie food perhaps
To spiritual Natures; only this I know,
That one Celestial Father gives to all.
To whom the Angel. Therefore what he gives
(Whose praise be ever sung) to man in part
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found
No ingrateful° food: and food alike those pure
Intelligential substances° require
As doth your Rational; and both contain
Within them every lower facultie
Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste,
Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate,
And corporeal to incorporeal turn.
For know, whatever was created, needs
To be sustaind and fed; of Elements
The grosser feeds the purer, Earth the Sea,
Earth and the Sea feed Air, the Air those Fires°
Ethereal, and as lowest first the Moon;
Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurg’d
Vapours not yet into her substance turnd.
Nor doth the Moon no nourishment exhale
From her moist Continent to higher Orbes.
The Sun that light imparts to all, receives
From all his alimental° recompence
In humid exhalations, and at Even
Sups with the Ocean: though in Heav’n the Trees
Of life ambrosial° frutage bear, and vines
Yield Nectar, though from off the boughs each Morn

unwelcome
angels

heavenly bodies

nourishing

heavenly, fragrant

404–500. Raphael’s discourse and dialogue about the nature of things recall Lucretius’ De Rerum Natura
(“Of the Nature of Things”), often termed a philosophic epic; Raphael chooses a brief version of that genre
for his exposition.
404–13. As a monist who believed that all creation is of “one first matter” (472; see also Christian Doctrine
1.7), Milton denied the more common (dualistic) idea that angels are pure spirits (who would not eat or
have any experiences pertaining to the senses); he held instead that angels are of a very highly refined
material substance .
412 concoct, digest, assimilate. The three stages of digestion.
414–26 The grosser feeds the purer. That all features of the natural world require sustenance from creatures below them in the scale of being was a commonplace (Cf. Pliny, Natural History 2.9). Robert Fludd,
Utriusque cosmi historia (1617), has an engraving that shows the sun supping with the ocean (1.5 – 6).
418–20 spots. Raphael describes moonspots as undigested vapors not yet assimilated to the moon’s substance.
Cf. 1.287–91, where those spots are described in Galileo’s terms as features of the moon’s landscape.
427–30. “Nectar” and “ambrosia” are the drink and food of the classical gods; Milton adds “pearly grain,”
like the manna showered on the Israelites in the desert (Cf. Exod. 16:14).

Book 5

430

435

440

445

450

455

460

We brush mellifluous° Dewes, and find the ground
Cover’d with pearly grain: yet God hath here
Varied his bounty so with new delights,
As may compare with Heaven; and to taste
Think not I shall be nice.° So down they sat,
And to thir viands fell, nor seemingly°
The Angel, nor in mist, the common gloss
Of Theologians, but with keen dispatch
Of real hunger, and concoctive° heate
To transubstantiate; what redounds, transpires
Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder; if by fire
Of sooty coal the Empiric° Alchimist
Can turn, or holds it possible to turn
Metals of drossiest Ore to perfet Gold
As from the Mine. Mean while at Table Eve
Ministerd naked, and thir flowing cups
With pleasant liquors crown’d:° O innocence
Deserving Paradise! if ever, then,
Then had the Sons of God excuse to have bin
Enamour’d at that sight; but in those hearts
Love unlibidinous° reign’d, nor jealousie
Was understood, the injur’d Lovers Hell.
Thus when with meats and drinks they had suffic’d
Not burd’nd Nature, sudden mind arose
In Adam, not to let th’ occasion pass
Given him by this great Conference to know
Of things above his World, and of thir being
Who dwell in Heav’n, whose excellence he saw
Transcend his own so farr, whose radiant forms
Divine effulgence,° whose high Power so far
Exceeded human, and his wary speech
Thus to th’ Empyreal Minister he fram’d.
Inhabitant with God, now know I well

135
sweet, honey-flowing

finicky, fastidious
in show

digestive

experimental

filled to the brim

without lust

shining

435 in mist. The usual explanation (“common gloss”) of orthodox theologians was that when angels
appeared to humans they took bodies of air. See lines 299 – 300 above, and note.
438 transubstantiate. In common theological use, the Roman Catholic doctrine that the bread and wine of
the eucharist are in their substance transformed into the body and blood of Christ. Milton vigorously denied
that doctrine, describing as a true transubstantiation the angels’ transformation of earthly food into their
more highly refined substance. The residue (“what redounds”) passes out as vapor through the pores (“transpires”) – the angelic form of excretion.
446–8 Sons of God. A patristic tradition identifies them with angels (as here) though they are usually said
to be human sons of Seth, as in 11.621–2. Gen. 6:2 tells of their marriage to the daughters of men.

136

465

470

475

480

485
 
Thy favour, in this honour done to man,
Under whose lowly roof thou hast voutsaf ’t
To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste,
Food not of Angels, yet accepted so,
As that more willingly thou couldst not seem
At Heav’n’s high feasts to have fed: yet what compare?
To whom the winged Hierarch° repli’d.
O Adam, one Almightie is, from whom
All things proceed, and up to him return,
If not deprav’d from good, created all
Such to perfection, one first matter all,
Indu’d with various forms, various degrees
Of substance, and in things that live, of life;
But more refin’d, more spiritous, and pure,
As neerer to him plac’t or neerer tending
Each in thir several active Sphears assignd,
Till body up to spirit work, in bounds°
Proportiond to each kind. So from the root
Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves
More aerie, last the bright consummate° floure
Spirits odorous breathes: flours and thir fruit
Mans nourishment, by gradual scale sublim’d
To vital Spirits aspire, to animal,
To intellectual, give both life and sense,
Fansie and understanding, whence the Soule
Reason receives, and reason is her being,
Discursive, or Intuitive; discourse
Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours,

potentate

limits, leaps

complete, perfect

469–79. Milton held that the universe was created out of Chaos, not out of nothing (ex nihilo), the orthodox
position. The primal matter of Chaos had its origin in God, who subsequently created all things from that
matter (see 7.168–73). This materialist monism denies sharp distinctions between angels and men, spirit
and matter, all being of one substance with different degrees of refinement. The universe Raphael
describes is hierarchical but also dynamic and striving, as beings become increasingly spiritual (“spiritous”)
or increasingly gross depending on their moral choices (see Christian Doctrine 1.7).
479–87. The plant figure provides an illustration of the dynamism of being in Milton’s universe, and further
explains why Raphael can eat the fruit. That fruit is transformed into various orders of “spirits”: “vital,”
fluids in the blood sustaining life; “animal,” produced from the vital spirits and controlling sensation and
motion; and “intellectual,” spirits controlling the faculties of the soul – fancy, understanding, and reason.
The soul derives her being from the spirits and so is material.
483 sublim’d. Raised to a higher state, an alchemical term referring to the change of a solid into a gas.
488–90 Discursive, or Intuitive. According to the traditional dualist assumption, angels are pure spirits whose
intuition (immediate apprehension of truth) is absolutely distinct from human reason (which involved combining data and arguing from premises to conclusions). Milton makes the distinction only relative,
“Differing but in degree.”

Book 5

137

490 Differing but in degree, of kind the same.

495

500

505

510

515

520

525

Wonder not then, what God for you saw good
If I refuse not, but convert, as you,
To proper° substance; time may come when men
With Angels may participate, and find
No inconvenient Diet, nor too light Fare:
And from these corporal nutriments perhaps
Your bodies may at last turn all to Spirit,
Improv’d by tract° of time, and wingd ascend
Ethereal, as wee, or may at choice
Here or in Heav’nly Paradises dwell;
If ye be found obedient, and retain
Unalterably firm his love entire
Whose progenie you are. Mean while enjoy
Your fill what happiness this happie state
Can comprehend, incapable° of more.
To whom the Patriarch of mankind repli’d.
O favourable spirit, propitious° guest,
Well hast thou taught the way that might direct
Our knowledge, and the scale of Nature set
From center to circumference, whereon
In contemplation of created things
By steps we may ascend to God. But say,
What meant that caution joind, if ye be found
Obedient? can we want° obedience then
To him, or possibly his love desert
Who formd us from the dust, and plac’d us here
Full to the utmost measure of what bliss
Human desires can seek or apprehend?
To whom the Angel. Son of Heav’n and Earth,
Attend: That thou art happie, owe to God;
That thou continu’st such, owe to thy self,
That is, to thy obedience; therein stand.
This was that caution giv’n thee; be advis’d.
God made thee perfet, not immutable;°
And good he made thee, but to persevere
He left it in thy power, ordaind thy will

my own

passage

unable to contain
gracious

lack

unchangeable

498–501. Cf. 7.157–61.
509 scale of Nature. The “Chain of Being” extending from God down to the lowest element of creation
(see, e.g., Macrobius, In Somnium Scipionis 1.14.15).
520–43. Cf. 3.93–128.

138

530

535

540

545

550

555

560
 
By nature free, not over-rul’d by Fate
Inextricable, or strict necessity;
Our voluntarie service he requires,
Not our necessitated, such with him
Findes no acceptance, nor can find, for how
Can hearts, not free, be tri’d whether they serve
Willing or no, who will but what they must
By Destinie, and can no other choose?
My self and all th’ Angelic Host that stand
In sight of God enthron’d, our happie state
Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds;
On other surety° none; freely we serve,
Because we freely love, as in our will
To love or not; in this we stand or fall:
And som are fall’n, to disobedience fall’n,
And so from Heav’n to deepest Hell; O fall
From what high state of bliss into what woe!
To whom our great Progenitor. Thy words
Attentive, and with more delighted eare,
Divine instructer, I have heard, then when
Cherubic Songs° by night from neighbouring Hills
Aereal Music send: nor knew I not
To be both will and deed created free;
Yet that we never shall forget to love
Our maker, and obey him whose command
Single, is yet so just, my constant thoughts
Assur’d me, and still assure: though what thou tellst
Hath past in Heav’n, som doubt within me move,
But more desire to hear, if thou consent,
The full relation, which must needs be strange,
Worthy of Sacred silence to be heard;
And we have yet large day, for scarce the Sun
Hath finisht half his journey, and scarce begins
His other half in the great Zone° of Heav’n.
Thus Adam made request, and Raphael
After short pause assenting, thus began.
High matter thou injoinst me, O prime° of men,

guarantee

songs of Cherubim

zodiac

first, most excellent

557 Worthy of Sacred silence. Translates Horace, Odes 2.13.29, referring to songs sung by Alcaeus and Sappho
in Hades; their words are “sacro digna silentio.”
563 High matter. Raphael’s account of the war in Heaven is an epic device, a narrative of past action; it is
also a mini-epic itself, with traditional battles, challenges, and single combats. As an “epic” poet treating
sacred matter, Raphael confronts a narrative challenge similar to Milton’s own.

Book 5

565

570

575

580

585

590

595

Sad task and hard, for how shall I relate
To human sense th’ invisible exploits
Of warring Spirits; how without remorse°
The ruin of so many glorious once
And perfet while they stood; how last unfould
The secrets of another world, perhaps
Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good
This is dispenc’t,° and what surmounts the reach
Of human sense, I shall delineate so,
By lik’ning spiritual to corporal forms,
As may express them best, though what if Earth
Be but the shaddow of Heav’n, and things therein
Each to other like, more then on earth is thought?
As yet this World was not, and Chaos wilde
Reignd where these Heav’ns now rowl, where Earth now rests
Upon her Center pois’d, when on a day
(For Time, though in Eternitie, appli’d
To motion, measures all things durable
By present, past, and future) on such day
As Heav’ns great Year brings forth, th’ Empyreal Host
Of Angels by Imperial summons call’d,
Innumerable before th’ Almighties Throne
Forthwith from all the ends of Heav’n appeerd
Under thir Hierarchs° in orders bright
Ten thousand thousand Ensignes high advanc’d,
Standards and Gonfalons twixt Van and Reare
Streame in the Aire, and for distinction serve
Of Hierarchies, of Orders, and Degrees;
Or in thir glittering Tissues° bear imblaz’d
Holy Memorials, acts of Zeale and Love
Recorded eminent. Thus when in Orbes
Of circuit° inexpressible they stood,
Orb within Orb, the Father infinite,

139

sorrow

permitted

leaders, potentates

fine cloth

circumference

571–6. Raphael first explains his narrative strategy in terms of the traditional notion of “accommodation,”
couching spiritual matters in “corporal” terms that humans can understand; but he then extends the Platonic
idea that earth is a shadow of heaven (Republic 10.397B –598D) to suggest that the two realms are more
similar than earthly thinkers have supposed.
580–2. Countering a long philosophical tradition, Milton asserts the existance of time and motion in Heaven,
before the creation of the universe (see Christian Doctrine 1.7).
583 great Year. The cycle completed when all the heavenly bodies simultaneously return to their original
positions (see, e.g., Plato, Timaeus 39d). A common estimate of that cycle was 36,000 earth years.
589 Gonfalons. Flags hung from a crossbar.
Van. Vanguard.

140

600

605

610

615

620

625
 
By whom in bliss imbosom’d sat the Son,
Amidst as from a flaming Mount, whose top
Brightness had made invisible, thus spake.
Hear all ye Angels, Progenie of Light,
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,
Hear my Decree, which unrevok’t shall stand.
This day I have begot whom I declare
My onely Son, and on this holy Hill
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold
At my right hand; your Head I him appoint;
And by my Self have sworn to him shall bow
All knees in Heav’n, and shall confess him Lord:
Under his great Vice-gerent° Reign abide
United as one individual° Soule
For ever happie: him who disobeyes
Mee disobeyes, breaks union, and that day
Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls
Into utter° darkness, deep ingulft, his place
Ordaind without redemption, without end.
So spake th’ Omnipotent, and with his words
All seemd well pleas’d, all seem’d, but were not all.
That day, as other solemn° dayes, they spent
In song and dance about the sacred Hill,
Mystical dance, which yonder starrie Spheare°
Of Planets and of fixt° in all her Wheeles
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,
Eccentric, intervolv’d,° yet regular
Then most, when most irregular they seem,
And in thir motions harmonie Divine
So smooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear
Listens delighted. Eevning now approach’d
(For wee have also our Eevning and our Morn,

deputy, vice-regent
inseparable, indivisible

total, outer

ceremonial, festival
the heavens
fixed stars
intertwined

603–5: Cf. Ps. 2:7: “I will declare the decree . . . Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee.” This
episode refers to the exaltation of the Son as King, not his actual begetting, since he is elsewhere described
as “of all Creation first” (3.383), and as God’s agent in creating the angels and everything else (5.835 – 8).
606. Cf. Col. 2:10: “Ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principality and power.”
607–8 by my Self have sworn. At Gen. 22:16, God swears by himself to bless Abraham. See Phil. 2:9 –11:
“God also hath highly exalted him . . . That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven,
and things in earth, and things under the earth” (cf. Isa. 45:23).
620–7 Mystical dance. The “intricate” dance of the angels produces “harmonie Divine,” like the “intricate”
movements of the stars and the planets in both circular and noncircular (“Eccentric”) orbits that produce
the music of the spheres according to the Pythagorean theory.

Book 5

630

635

640

645

650

655

660

665

Wee ours for change delectable, not need)
Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn
Desirous; all in Circles as they stood,
Tables are set, and on a sudden pil’d
With Angels Food, and rubied Nectar flows
In Pearl, in Diamond, and massie Gold,
Fruit of delicious Vines, the growth of Heav’n.
On flours repos’d, and with fresh flourets crownd,
They eate, they drink, and in communion sweet
Quaff immortalitie and joy, secure
Of surfet where full measure onely bounds
Excess, before th’ all bounteous King, who showrd
With copious hand, rejoycing in thir joy.
Now when ambrosial° Night with Clouds exhal’d
From that high mount of God, whence light & shade
Spring both, the face of brightest Heav’n had changd
To grateful° Twilight (for Night comes not there
In darker veile) and roseat° Dews dispos’d
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest,
Wide over all the Plain, and wider farr
Then all this globous Earth in Plain out spred,
(Such are the Courts of God). Th’ Angelic throng
Disperst in Bands and Files thir Camp extend
By living Streams among the Trees of Life,
Pavilions numberless, and sudden reard,
Celestial Tabernacles, where they slept
Fannd with coole Winds, save those who in thir course°
Melodious Hymns about the sovran Throne
Alternate all night long: but not so wak’d
Satan, so call him now, his former name
Is heard no more in Heav’n; he of the first,
If not the first Arch-Angel, great in Power,
In favour and præeminence, yet fraught
With envie against the Son of God, that day
Honourd by his great Father, and proclaimd
Messiah King anointed, could not beare
Through pride that sight, & thought himself impaird.°

141

fragrant

pleasing
rose-scented

appointed task

reduced, disrespected

658–9 former name. Traditionally understood to be Lucifer: “How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer,
son of the morning” (Isa. 14:12). The poem claims that his former name was blotted from the books of
life (see PL 1.361–5).
664 Messiah. In Hebrew the name means “anointed.”

142

670

675

680

685

690

695

700
 
Deep malice thence conceiving and disdain,
Soon as midnight brought on the duskie houre
Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolv’d
With all his Legions to dislodge,° and leave
Unworshipt, unobey’d the Throne supream
Contemptuous, and his next subordinate
Awak’ning, thus to him in secret spake.
Sleepst thou, Companion dear, what sleep can close
Thy eye-lids? and remembrest what Decree
Of yesterday, so late hath past the lips
Of Heav’ns Almightie. Thou to me thy thoughts
Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart;
Both waking we were one; how then can now
Thy sleep dissent? new Laws thou seest impos’d;
New Laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise
In us who serve, new Counsels, to debate°
What doubtful may ensue; more in this place
To utter is not safe. Assemble thou
Of all those Myriads which we lead the chief;
Tell them that by command, ere yet dim Night
Her shadowie Cloud withdraws, I am to haste,
And all who under me thir Banners wave,
Homeward with flying march where we possess
The Quarters of the North, there to prepare
Fit entertainment to receive our King
The great Messiah, and his new commands,
Who speedily through all the Hierarchies
Intends to pass triumphant, and give Laws.
So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infus’d
Bad influence into th’ unwarie brest
Of his Associate; hee together calls,
Or several one by one, the Regent Powers,
Under him Regent, tells, as he was taught,
That the most High commanding, now ere Night,
Now ere dim Night had disincumberd Heav’n,
The great Hierarchal Standard was to move;

leave camp

discuss

671 next subordinate. His original name in Heaven is also lost, but he will come to be known as Beelzebub
(2.299–300).
673 Sleepst thou. In many epics a voice awakens heroes or villains from sleep and lures them to rash or
adventurous acts.
689 North. The traditional site of Lucifer’s throne. See Isa. 14:13: “I will exalt my throne above the stars of
God . . . in the sides of the north.”

Book 5

705

710

715

720

725

730

735

Tells the suggested° cause, and casts between
Ambiguous words and jealousies,° to sound°
Or taint integritie; but all obey’d
The wonted° signal, and superior voice
Of thir great Potentate;° for great indeed
His name, and high was his degree in Heav’n;
His count’nance, as the Morning Starr that guides
The starrie flock, allur’d them, and with lyes
Drew after him the third part of Heav’ns Host:
Mean while th’ Eternal eye, whose sight discernes
Abstrusest° thoughts, from forth his holy Mount
And from within the golden Lamps that burne
Nightly before him, saw without thir light
Rebellion rising, saw in whom, how spred
Among the sons of Morn,° what multitudes
Were banded to oppose his high Decree;
And smiling to his onely Son thus said.
Son, thou in whom my glory I behold
In full resplendence, Heir of all my might,
Neerly° it now concernes us to be sure
Of our Omnipotence, and with what Arms
We mean to hold what anciently we claim
Of Deitie or Empire, such a foe
Is rising, who intends to erect his Throne
Equal to ours, throughout the spacious North;
Nor so content, hath in his thought to try°
In battel, what our Power is, or our right.
Let us advise, and to this hazard draw
With speed what force is left, and all imploy
In our defense, lest unawares we lose
This our high place, our Sanctuarie, our Hill.
To whom the Son with calm aspect and cleer
Light’ning Divine, ineffable, serene,
Made answer. Mightie Father, thou thy foes
Justly hast in derision, and secure
Laugh’st at thir vain designes and tumults vain,

143
insinuated
suspicions / test
customary
leader

most secret

angels

urgently

test

708 Morning Starr. An allusion to Satan as Lucifer, compared to the star Venus or Hesperus which bore the
name Lucifer when it appeared as the first star in the morning (see notes to lines 166 and 658 above).
710 third part. Cf. Rev. 12:4: “And his [the dragon’s] tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did
cast them to the earth.”
735–7. Cf. Ps. 2:4: “He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision.”

144

740

745

750

755

760

765

770
 
Matter to mee of Glory, whom thir hate
Illustrates,° when they see all Regal Power
Giv’n me to quell thir pride, and in event°
Know whether I be dextrous to subdue
Thy Rebels, or be found the worst in Heav’n.
So spake the Son, but Satan with his Powers°
Far was advanc’t on winged speed, an Host
Innumerable as the Starrs of Night,
Or Starrs of Morning, Dew-drops, which the Sun
Impearls on every leaf and every flouer.
Regions they pass’d, the mightie Regencies°
Of Seraphim and Potentates and Thrones
In thir triple Degrees, Regions to° which
All thy Dominion, Adam, is no more
Then what this Garden is to all the Earth,
And all the Sea, from one entire globose°
Stretcht into Longitude;° which having pass’d
At length into the limits° of the North
They came, and Satan to his Royal seat
High on a Hill, far blazing, as a Mount
Rais’d on a Mount, with Pyramids and Towrs
From Diamond Quarries hew’n, and Rocks of Gold,
The Palace of great Lucifer, (so call
That Structure in the Dialect of men
Interpreted) which not long after, he
Affecting° all equality with God,
In imitation of that Mount whereon
Messiah was declar’d in sight of Heav’n,
The Mountain of the Congregation call’d;
For thither he assembl’d all his Train,
Pretending so commanded to consult
About the great reception of thir King,
Thither to come, and with calumnious Art
Of counterfeted truth thus held thir ears.
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,
If these magnific Titles yet remain

makes illustrious
by the outcome

armies

dominions
compared to

sphere, globe
spread out flat
regions

arrogating to himself

741 dextrous. Skillful, but also with the Latin meaning of “right hand,” in reference to the Son at God’s right
hand (606 above).
750. See note to line 371, above.
766 Mountain of the Congregation. Cf. Isa. 14:13–14, where Lucifer is quoted, “I will sit also upon the mount
of the congregation, in the sides of the north: . . . I will be like the most High.”

Book 5

775

780

785

790

795

800

805

Not meerly titular, since by Decree
Another now hath to himself ingross’t°
All Power, and us eclipst under the name
Of King anointed, for whom all this haste
Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here,
This onely to consult how we may best
With what may be devis’d of honours new
Receive him coming to receive from us
Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile,
Too much to one, but double how endur’d,
To one and to his image now proclaim’d?
But what if better counsels might erect
Our minds and teach us to cast off this Yoke?
Will ye submit your necks, and chuse to bend
The supple knee? ye will not, if I trust
To know ye right, or if ye know your selves
Natives and Sons of Heav’n possest before
By none, and if not equal all, yet free,
Equally free; for Orders and Degrees
Jarr not with liberty, but well consist.
Who can in reason then or right assume
Monarchie over such as live by right
His equals, if in power and splendor less,
In freedome equal? or can introduce
Law and Edict on us, who without law
Erre not, much less for this to be our Lord,
And look for adoration to th’ abuse
Of those Imperial Titles which assert
Our being ordain’d to govern, not to serve?
Thus farr his bold discourse without controule°
Had audience,° when among the Seraphim
Abdiel, then whom none with more zeale ador’d
The Deitie, and divine commands obei’d,
Stood up, and in a flame of zeale severe
The current of his fury thus oppos’d.

145

monopolized

hindrance
hearing

787–802. Compare Milton’s republican theory, stated in the Tenure of Kings and Magistrates: “No man who
knows ought, can be so stupid to deny that all men naturally were borne free, being the image and resemblance of God himself, and were by privilege above all the creatures, born to command and not to obey:
and that they liv’d so” (until Adam’s sin necessitated magistrates and laws, though sovereign power always
remained with the people). Cf. Adam’s natural republicanism, when learning of the first king, Nimrod
(PL 12.64–71).
805 Abdiel. Hebrew, “Servant of God.”

146

810

815

820

825

830

835

840
 
O argument blasphemous, false and proud!
Words which no eare ever to hear in Heav’n
Expected, least of all from thee, ingrate
In place thy self so high above thy Peeres.
Canst thou with impious obloquie° condemne
The just Decree of God, pronounc’t and sworn,
That to his only Son by right endu’d
With Regal Scepter, every Soule in Heav’n
Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due
Confess him rightful King? unjust thou saist
Flatly unjust, to binde with Laws the free,
And equal over equals to let Reigne,
One over all with unsucceeded° power.
Shalt thou give Law to God, shalt thou dispute
With him the points of libertie, who made
Thee what thou art, and formd the Pow’rs of Heav’n
Such as he pleasd, and circumscrib’d thir being?
Yet by experience taught we know how good,
And of our good, and of our dignitie
How provident he is, how farr from thought
To make us less, bent rather to exalt
Our happie state under one Head more neer
United. But to grant it thee unjust,
That equal over equals Monarch Reigne:
Thy self though great and glorious dost thou count,
Or all Angelic Nature joind in one,
Equal to him begotten Son, by whom
As by his Word the mighty Father made
All things, ev’n thee, and all the Spirits of Heav’n
By him created in thir bright degrees,°
Crownd them with Glory, and to thir Glory nam’d
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,
Essential Powers, nor by his Reign obscur’d,
But more illustrious made, since he the Head

abusive speech

without successor

illustrious ranks

811 ingrate. Cf. 3.97.
822–5. Cf. Rom. 9:20: “O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him
that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?”
833–40. Cf. Col. 1:16: “For by him [the Son, the image of God] were all things created, that are in heaven,
and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities,
or powers, all things were created by him, and for him.” Milton believed that God created the Son “the
firstborn of every creature” (Col. 1:15), who then created the angels; as Abdiel argues, there can be no
equality between Creator and creature.

Book 5

845

850

855

860

865

870

875

880

One of our number thus reduc’t becomes,
His Laws our Laws, all honour to him done
Returns our own. Cease then this impious rage,
And tempt not these; but hast’n to appease
Th’ incensed Father, and th’ incensed Son,
While Pardon may be found in time besought.
So spake the fervent Angel, but his zeale
None seconded, as out of season judg’d,
Or singular and rash, whereat rejoic’d
Th’ Apostat, and more haughty thus repli’d.
That we were formd then saist thou? and the work
Of secondarie hands, by task transferd
From Father to his Son? strange point and new!
Doctrin which we would know whence learnt: who saw
When this creation was? rememberst thou
Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being?
We know no time when we were not as now;
Know none before us, self-begot, self-rais’d
By our own quick’ning power, when fatal course°
Had circl’d his full Orbe, the birth mature
Of this our native Heav’n, Ethereal Sons.
Our puissance° is our own, our own right hand
Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try
Who is our equal: then thou shalt behold
Whether by supplication we intend
Address,° and to begirt° th’ Almighty Throne
Beseeching or besieging. This report,
These tidings carrie to th’ anointed King;
And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight.
He said, and as the sound of waters deep
Hoarce murmur echo’d to his words applause
Through the infinite Host, nor less for that
The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone
Encompass’d round with foes, thus answerd bold.
O alienate from God, O spirit accurst,
Forsak’n of all good; I see thy fall
Determind, and thy hapless crew involv’d
In this perfidious fraud, contagion spred

147

ordained by fate

power

dutiful approach / surround

843 reduc’t. Suggests something like an incarnation of the Son for the angels.
856–9. Cf. 8.250–1, 276–82, Adam’s comment on his recollection of origins; also cf. 4.43– 5.
875 Seraph. Hebrew, “to burn.”

148

885

890

895

900

905
 
Both of thy crime and punishment: henceforth
No more be troubl’d how to quit the yoke
Of Gods Messiah; those indulgent Laws
Will not now be voutsaf ’t, other Decrees
Against thee are gon forth without recall;
That Golden Scepter which thou didst reject
Is now an Iron Rod to bruise and breake
Thy disobedience. Well thou didst advise,
Yet not for thy advise or threats I fly
These wicked Tents devoted,° least the wrauth
Impendent,° raging into sudden flame
Distinguish not: for soon expect to feel
His Thunder on thy head, devouring fire.
Then who created thee lamenting learne,
When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know.
So spake the Seraph Abdiel faithful found,
Among the faithless, faithful only hee;
Among innumerable false, unmov’d,
Unshak’n, unseduc’d, unterrifi’d
His Loyaltie he kept, his Love, his Zeale;
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind
Though single. From amidst them forth he passd,
Long way through hostile scorn, which he susteind
Superior, nor of violence fear’d aught;
And with retorted° scorn his back he turn’d
On those proud Towrs to swift destruction doom’d.

doomed
impending

returned

The End of the Fifth Book.

882–8. Abdiel speaks as an inspired prophet.
887 Iron Rod. See 2.327–8 and note.
889–93. Cf. Moses’ warning to the Israelites not to join Korah’s rebellion: “Depart, I pray you, from the tents
of these wicked men . . . lest ye be consumed in all their sins” (Num. 16:26). Cf. also Heb. 12:29: “For our
God is a consuming fire.”

BOOK 6
THE ARGUMENT
Raphael continues to relate how Michael and Gabriel were sent forth to battel against
Satan and his Angels. The first Fight describ’d: Satan and his Powers retire under
Night: He calls a Councel, invents devilish Engines, which in the second dayes Fight
put Michael and his Angels to some disorder; but, they at length pulling up
5 Mountains overwhelm’d both the force and Machins of Satan: Yet the Tumult not
so ending, God on the third day sends Messiah his Son, for whom he had reserv’d
the glory of that Victory: Hee in the Power of his Father coming to the place, and
causing all his Legions to stand still on either side, with his Chariot and Thunder
driving into the midst of his Enemies, pursues them unable to resist towards the wall
10 of Heaven; which opening, they leap down with horrour and confusion into the place
of punishment prepar’d for them in the Deep: Messiah returns with triumph to
his Father.

All night the dreadless° Angel unpursu’d
Through Heav’ns wide Champain° held his way, till Morn,
Wak’t by the circling Hours, with rosie hand
Unbarr’d the gates of Light. There is a Cave
5 Within the Mount of God, fast by his Throne,
Where light and darkness in perpetual round
Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heav’n
Grateful vicissitude,° like Day and Night;
Light issues forth, and at the other dore
10 Obsequious° darkness enters, till her houre
To veile the Heav’n, though darkness there might well
Seem twilight here; and now went forth the Morn
Such as in highest Heav’n, arrayd in Gold
Empyreal,° from before her vanisht Night,
15 Shot through with orient° Beams: when all the Plain
Coverd with thick embatteld° Squadrons bright,
Chariots and flaming Armes, and fierie Steeds
Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view:
Warr he perceav’d, warr in procinct,° and found

fearless
plain

delightful change
dutiful

heavenly
from the east, lustrous
set in battle array

readiness

3 devilish Engines. Artillery, cannon.
2–3 Morn. Aurora, goddess of the dawn.
Hours. daughters of Jove who control the seasons and guard
the gates of Heaven.
rosie hand. echoes the Homeric formula “rosy-fingered dawn” (Iliad 1.477).
4–14. Hesiod’s cave in the abyss where Night and Day alternate (Theogony 744 – 57), here relocated “fast by”
(next to) God’s throne.

150
 
20 Already known what he for news had thought

25

30

35

40

45

50

To have reported: gladly then he mixt
Among those friendly Powers who him receav’d
With joy and acclamations loud, that one
That of so many Myriads fall’n, yet one
Returnd not lost: On to the sacred hill
They led him high applauded, and present
Before the seat supream; from whence a voice
From midst a Golden Cloud thus milde was heard.
Servant of God, well done, well hast thou fought
The better fight, who single hast maintaind
Against revolted multitudes the Cause
Of Truth, in word mightier then they in Armes;
And for the testimonie of Truth hast born
Universal reproach, far worse to beare
Then violence: for this was all thy care
To stand approv’d in sight of God, though Worlds
Judg’d thee perverse: the easier conquest now
Remains thee, aided by this host of friends,
Back on thy foes more glorious to return
Then scornd thou didst depart, and to subdue
By force, who reason for thir Law refuse,
Right reason for thir Law, and for thir King
Messiah, who by right of merit Reigns.
Go Michael of Celestial Armies Prince,
And thou in Military prowess next
Gabriel, lead forth to Battel these my Sons°
Invincible, lead forth my armed Saints
By Thousands and by Millions rang’d for fight;
Equal in number to that Godless crew
Rebellious, them with Fire and hostile Arms
Fearless assault, and to the brow° of Heav’n

angels

edge

29–30 Servant of God. Literal translation of the Hebrew name Abdiel. Echoes the parable of the talents
(Matt. 25:21), “Well done, thou good and faithful servant.”
better fight. Cf. 1 Tim. 6:12, “Fight
the good fight of faith.”
42 Right reason. True, upright reason, translating the Stoic and Scholastic recta ratio.
43 by right of merit. See 3.309 and 2.5–6.
44 Michael. Hebrew, “Who is like God”; in Jewish and patristic tradition he is prince of the angels. Cf. Rev.
12:7–9 for his role in the battle in Heaven.
46 Gabriel. Hebrew, “Strength of God.”
49 Equal in number. As one-third of the angels rebelled, God sends out only an equal number of those who
remained loyal.

Book 6

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

Pursuing drive them out from God and bliss,
Into thir place of punishment, the Gulf
Of Tartarus,° which ready opens wide
His fiery Chaos to receave thir fall.
So spake the Sovran voice, and Clouds began
To darken all the Hill, and smoak to rowl
In duskie wreathes, reluctant° flames, the signe
Of wrauth awak’t: nor with less dread the loud
Ethereal Trumpet from on high gan° blow:
At which command the Powers Militant,
That stood for Heav’n, in mighty Quadrate° joyn’d
Of Union irresistible, mov’d on
In silence thir bright Legions, to the sound
Of instrumental Harmonie that breath’d
Heroic Ardor to advent’rous deeds
Under thir God-like Leaders, in the Cause
Of God and his Messiah. On they move
Indissolubly firm; nor obvious° Hill,
Nor streit’ning° Vale, nor Wood, nor Stream divides
Thir perfet ranks; for high above the ground
Thir march was, and the passive Air upbore
Thir nimble tread, as when the total kind
Of Birds in orderly array on wing
Came summond over Eden to receive
Thir names of thee; so over many a tract
Of Heav’n they march’d, and many a Province wide
Tenfold the length of this terrene:° at last
Farr in th’ Horizon to the North appeer’d
From skirt to skirt° a fierie Region, stretcht
In battailous° aspect, and neerer view
Bristl’d with upright beams° innumerable
Of rigid Spears, and Helmets throng’d, and Shields
Various, with boastful Argument° portraid,
The banded Powers of Satan hasting on
With furious expedition;° for they weend°
That self same day by fight, or by surprize
To win the Mount of God, and on his Throne

151

Hell

writhing
began to
square formation

standing in the way
enclosing

earth, terrain
edge to edge
warlike
shafts
heraldic devices
speed / thought

64–6 instrumental Harmonie. Cf. 1.549–53, where the fallen angels march to music by flutes and recorders
in the Dorian mode, also prompting to heroic action.
73–6. Similes comparing armies to birds are epic commonplaces (cf. Iliad 2.459 – 64, Aeneid 7.699 –701), but
Raphael adapts his simile to Adam’s experience (cf. PL 8.349 –54).

152

90

95

100

105

110

115

120

125
 
To set the envier of his State, the proud
Aspirer, but thir thoughts prov’d fond° and vain
In the mid way: though strange to us it seemd
At first, that Angel should with Angel warr,
And in fierce hosting° meet, who wont° to meet
So oft in Festivals of joy and love
Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire
Hymning th’ Eternal Father: but the shout
Of Battel now began, and rushing sound
Of onset ended soon each milder thought.
High in the midst exalted as a God
Th’ Apostate in his Sun-bright Chariot sate
Idol of Majesty Divine, enclos’d
With Flaming Cherubim, and golden Shields;
Then lighted from his gorgeous Throne, for now
‘Twixt Host and Host but narrow space was left,
A dreadful intervall, and Front to Front
Presented stood in terrible array
Of hideous length: before the cloudie Van,°
On the rough edge° of battel ere it joyn’d,
Satan with vast and haughtie strides advanc’t,
Came towring, armd in Adamant and Gold;
Abdiel that sight endur’d not, where he stood
Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds,
And thus his own undaunted heart explores.
O Heav’n! that such resemblance of the Highest
Should yet remain, where faith and realtie°
Remain not; wherefore should not strength and might
There fail where Vertue fails, or weakest prove
Where boldest; though to sight° unconquerable?
His puissance,° trusting in th’ Almightie’s aide,
I mean to try, whose Reason I have tri’d°
Unsound and false; nor is it aught but just,
That he who in debate of Truth hath won,
Should win in Arms, in both disputes alike
Victor; though brutish that contest and foule,
When Reason hath to deal with force, yet so
Most reason is that Reason overcome.
So pondering, and from his armed Peers

105 intervall. Latin, intervallum, the space between two armed camps.
110 Adamant. A mythical substance of great hardness.

foolish

hostility / were used

frowning vanguard
front line

sincerity

apparently
power
proved by trial

Book 6

130

135

140

145

150

155

160

Forth stepping opposite, half way he met
His daring foe, at this prevention° more
Incens’t, and thus securely° him defi’d.
Proud, art thou met? thy hope was to have reacht
The highth of thy aspiring unoppos’d,
The Throne of God unguarded, and his side
Abandond at the terror of thy Power
Or potent tongue; fool, not to think how vain
Against th’ Omnipotent to rise in Arms;
Who out of smallest things could without end
Have rais’d incessant Armies to defeat
Thy folly; or with solitarie hand
Reaching beyond all limit at one blow
Unaided could have finisht thee, and whelmd
Thy Legions under darkness; but thou seest
All are not of thy Train; there be° who Faith
Prefer, and Pietie to God, though then
To thee not visible, when I alone
Seemd in thy World erroneous to dissent
From all: my Sect thou seest, now learn too late
How few somtimes may know, when thousands err.
Whom the grand foe with scornful eye askance
Thus answerd. Ill for thee, but in wisht houre
Of my revenge, first sought for thou returnst
From flight, seditious Angel, to receave
Thy merited reward, the first assay°
Of this right hand provok’t, since first that tongue
Inspir’d with contradiction durst oppose
A third part of the Gods, in Synod met
Thir Deities to assert, who while they feel
Vigour Divine within them, can allow
Omnipotence to none. But well thou comst
Before thy fellows, ambitious to win

153

obstruction
confidently

there are those

trial, attack

145–8 dissent. Puritans who refused to adhere to the national church after the Restoration were termed
dissenters.
Sect. A term used by adherents of the Church of England and by Presbyterians to smear
those who separated from the national church. Abdiel’s terms align him with those Puritan schismatics –
Baptists, Quakers, Socinians, and others – whom Milton often defended in his prose tracts; like them Abdiel
claims that truth may reside with a single “dissenter” or sect of a few.
152–6 seditious. Treasonous. Satan’s language aligns him with those Anglicans after the Restoration who
denounced dissenters as traitors, with Presbyterians who look to a “Synod” (a Presbyterian assembly) to
define truth, and with conformists of all stripes who think truth is confirmed by numbers (“A third part
of the Gods”).

154

165

170

175

180

185

190
 
From me som Plume,° that thy success may show
Destruction to the rest: this pause between
(Unanswerd least thou boast) to let thee know;
At first I thought that Libertie and Heav’n
To heav’nly Soules had bin all one; but now
I see that most through sloth had rather serve,
Ministring Spirits, traind up in Feast and Song;
Such hast thou arm’d, the Minstrelsie of Heav’n,
Servilitie with freedom to contend,
As both thir deeds compar’d this day shall prove.
To whom in brief thus Abdiel stern repli’d.
Apostat, still thou errst, nor end wilt find
Of erring, from the path of truth remote:
Unjustly thou deprav’st° it with the name
Of Servitude to serve whom God ordains,
Or Nature; God and Nature bid the same,
When he who rules is worthiest, and excells
Them whom he governs. This is servitude,
To serve th’ unwise, or him who hath rebelld
Against his worthier, as thine now serve thee,
Thy self not free, but to thy self enthrall’d;
Yet leudly° dar’st our ministring upbraid.
Reign thou in Hell thy Kingdom, let mee serve
In Heav’n God ever blest, and his Divine
Behests obey, worthiest to be obey’d,
Yet Chains in Hell, not Realms expect: mean while
From mee returnd, as erst° thou saidst, from flight,
This greeting on thy impious Crest receive.
So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high,
Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell
On the proud Crest of Satan, that no sight,
Nor motion of swift thought, less could his Shield
Such ruin intercept: ten paces huge
He back recoild; the tenth on bended knee

trophy

vilify, pervert

ignorantly, basely

formerly

163 Unanswerd least thou boast. i.e., lest you boast that I did not answer your argument.
167–9 Ministring. Satan’s contemptuous pun links the angels’ service (“ministring”), which he terms
“Servilitie,” with the street songs of minstrels (“Minstrelsie of Heav’n”).
174–81 Nature. Abdiel cites a “natural law” principle set forth by Aristotle and by Milton in the Second Defense,
that when one man excels all the rest in worthiness he should rule.
178–81 servitude. See 12.90–101. Milton often invoked the principle that tyrants are enslaved to their own
passions.
183–4. Cf. Satan’s words at 1.263.

Book 6

155

195 His massie Spear upstaid; as if on Earth

200

205

210

215

220

225

230

Winds under ground or waters forcing way
Sidelong, had push’t a Mountain from his seat
Half sunk with all his Pines. Amazement seis’d
The Rebel Thrones, but greater rage to see
Thus foil’d thir mightiest, ours joy filld, and shout,
Presage of Victorie and fierce desire
Of Battel: whereat Michael bid sound
Th’ Arch-Angel trumpet; through the vast° of Heaven
It sounded, and the faithful Armies rung°
Hosanna to the Highest: nor stood at gaze
The adverse Legions, nor less hideous joyn’d
The horrid shock: now storming furie rose,
And clamour such as heard in Heav’n till now
Was never, Arms on Armour clashing bray’d°
Horrible discord, and the madding° Wheeles
Of brazen Chariots rag’d; dire was the noise
Of conflict; over head the dismal hiss
Of fiery Darts in flaming volies flew,
And flying vaulted either Host with fire.
So under fierie Cope° together rush’d
Both Battels maine,° with ruinous assault
And inextinguishable rage; all Heav’n
Resounded, and had Earth bin then, all Earth
Had to her Center shook. What wonder? when
Millions of fierce encountring Angels fought
On either side, the least of whom could weild
These Elements, and arm him with the force
Of all thir Regions: how much more of Power
Armie against Armie numberless to raise
Dreadful combustion° warring, and disturb,
Though not destroy, thir happie Native seat;
Had not th’ Eternal King Omnipotent
From his strong hold of Heav’n high over-rul’d
And limited thir might; though numberd such°
As each divided Legion might have seemd
A numerous Host, in strength each armed hand

immense space
proclaimed aloud

made a harsh jarring noise
furiously whirling

sky
main sections of the armies

tumult

so numerous

196 Winds under ground. The supposed cause of earthquakes.
199 Rebel Thrones. Here as elsewhere Milton uses the name of one angelic order to stand for all. But the
term is politically suggestive, linking monarchs with rebellion against God. Cf. 12.36, Michael’s comment
that the first king, Nimrod, derived his name from “Rebellion.”

156

235

240

245

250

255

260

265
 
A Legion; led in fight, yet Leader seemd
Each Warriour single as in Chief, expert
When to advance, or stand, or turn the sway°
Of Battel, open when, and when to close
The ridges of grim Warr; no thought of flight,
None of retreat, no unbecoming deed
That argu’d fear; each on himself reli’d,
As° onely in his arm the moment° lay
Of victorie; deeds of eternal fame
Were don, but infinite: for wide was spred
That Warr and various; somtimes on firm ground
A standing fight, then soaring on main° wing
Tormented° all the Air; all Air seemd then
Conflicting Fire: long time in eeven scale
The Battel hung; till Satan, who that day
Prodigious power had shewn, and met in Armes
No equal, raunging through the dire attack
Of fighting Seraphim confus’d, at length
Saw where the Sword of Michael smote, and fell’d
Squadrons at once, with huge two-handed sway
Brandisht aloft the horrid edge came down
Wide wasting; such destruction to withstand
He hasted, and oppos’d the rockie Orb
Of tenfold Adamant, his ample Shield
A vast circumference: At his approach
The great Arch-Angel from his warlike toile
Surceas’d, and glad as hoping here to end
Intestine° War in Heav’n, the arch foe subdu’d
Or Captive drag’d in Chains, with hostile frown
And visage all enflam’d first thus began.
Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt,
Unnam’d in Heav’n, now plenteous, as thou seest
These Acts of hateful strife, hateful to all,
Though heaviest by just measure on thy self
And thy adherents: how hast thou disturb’d
Heav’ns blessed peace, and into Nature brought
Miserie, uncreated till the crime

force

as if / deciding factor

powerful
agitated

civil war

232–5. i.e., they had leaders, yet each single warrior seemed like a commander-in-chief, skilled in all military
operations.
254–5 rockie Orb. Satan’s “ample Shield” made of “tenfold Adamant,” a mythical impenetrable substance
imagined as folded ten times in thickness. Cf. 542–3 below.

Book 6

270

275

280

285

290

295

300

305

Of thy Rebellion? how hast thou instill’d
Thy malice into thousands, once upright
And faithful, now prov’d false. But think not here
To trouble Holy Rest; Heav’n casts thee out
From all her Confines. Heav’n the seat of bliss
Brooks° not the works of violence and Warr.
Hence then, and evil go with thee along
Thy ofspring, to the place of evil, Hell,
Thou and thy wicked crew; there mingle° broiles,
Ere this avenging Sword begin thy doome,
Or som more sudden vengeance wing’d from God
Precipitate thee with augmented paine.
So spake the Prince of Angels; to whom thus
The Adversarie. Nor think thou with wind
Of airie threats to aw whom yet with deeds
Thou canst not. Hast thou turnd the least of these
To flight, or if to fall, but that they rise
Unvanquisht, easier to transact with mee
That thou shouldst hope, imperious, and with threats
To chase me hence? erre not° that so shall end
The strife which thou call’st evil, but wee style
The strife of Glorie: which we mean to win,
Or turn this Heav’n it self into the Hell
Thou fablest, here however to dwell free,
If not to reign: mean while thy utmost force,
And join him nam’d Almighty to thy aid,
I flie not, but have sought thee farr and nigh.
They ended parle,° and both addresst° for fight
Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue
Of Angels, can relate, or to what things
Liken on Earth conspicuous, that may lift
Human imagination to such highth
Of Godlike Power: for likest Gods they seemd,
Stood they or mov’d, in stature, motion, arms
Fit to decide the Empire of great Heav’n.
Now wav’d thir fierie Swords, and in the Aire
Made horrid Circles; two broad Suns thir Shields
Blaz’d opposite, while expectation stood
In horror; from each hand with speed retir’d

282 Adversarie. Literal translation of the Hebrew name Satan.

157

endures

concoct

don’t falsely suppose

parlay / prepared

158

310

315

320

325

330

335

340
 
Where erst° was thickest fight, th’ Angelic throng,
And left large field, unsafe within the wind
Of such commotion, such as to set forth
Great things by small, if Natures concord broke,
Among the Constellations warr were sprung,
Two Planets rushing from aspect maligne
Of fiercest opposition in mid Skie,
Should combat, and thir jarring Sphears confound.
Together both with next to Almightie Arme,
Uplifted imminent one stroke they aim’d
That might determine,° and not need repeate,
As not of power,° at once; nor odds° appeerd
In might or swift prevention;° but the sword
Of Michael from the Armorie of God
Was giv’n him temperd so, that neither keen
Nor solid might resist that edge: it met
The sword of Satan with steep force to smite
Descending, and in half cut sheere, nor staid,
But with swift wheele reverse, deep entring shar’d°
All his right side; then Satan first knew pain,
And writh’ d him to and fro convolv’d;° so sore°
The griding° sword with discontinuous° wound
Pass’d through him, but th’ Ethereal substance clos’d
Not long divisible, and from the gash
A stream of Nectarous humor issuing flow’d
Sanguin, such as Celestial Spirits may bleed,
And all his Armour staind ere while so bright.
Forthwith on all sides to his aide was run
By Angels many and strong, who interpos’d
Defence, while others bore him on thir Shields
Back to his Chariot; where it stood retir’d
From off the files of warr; there they him laid
Gnashing for anguish and despite and shame
To find himself not matchless, and his pride
Humbl’d by such rebuke, so farr beneath
His confidence to equal God in power.

formerly

decide the issue
not able / inequality
preparation

sheared, cut off
contorted / painfully
keenly cutting / gaping

310–15 to set forth / Great things by small. A Virgilian formula, here introducing an epic simile comparing the single combat of Satan and Michael (“great things”) with war among the planets (“small” by comparison), prompted by the clash of two planets from opposed positions causing a “malign” influence and
throwing into discord the music of the spheres (“jarring Sphears”).
330–3 Nectarous humor. The fluid angels bleed because they drink nectar; cf. the ichor that flows from
Aphrodite’s wound, which also heals itself promptly (Iliad 5.339 – 42).
Sanguin. Blood red.

Book 6

345

350

355

360

365

370

375

Yet soon he heal’d; for Spirits that live throughout
Vital in every part, not as frail man
In Entrailes, Heart or Head, Liver or Reines;°
Cannot but by annihilating die;
Nor in thir liquid texture mortal wound
Receive, no more then can the fluid Aire:
All Heart they live, all Head, all Eye, all Eare,
All Intellect, all Sense, and as they please,
They Limb themselves, and colour, shape or size
Assume, as likes° them best, condense or rare.
Mean while in other parts like deeds deservd
Memorial, where the might of Gabriel fought,
And with fierce Ensignes pierc’d the deep array
Of Moloc furious King, who him defi’d
And at his Chariot wheeles to drag him bound
Threatn’d, nor from the Holie One of Heav’n
Refrein’d his tongue blasphemous; but anon
Down clov’n to the waste, with shatterd Armes
And uncouth° paine fled bellowing. On each wing
Uriel and Raphael his vaunting foe,
Though huge, and in a Rock of Diamond Armd,
Vanquish’d Adramelec, and Asmadai,
Two potent Thrones, that to be less then Gods
Disdain’d, but meaner thoughts learnd in thir flight,
Mangl’d with gastly wounds through Plate and Maile,
Nor stood unmindful Abdiel to annoy°
The Atheist crew, but with redoubl’d blow
Ariel and Arioc, and the violence
Of Ramiel scorcht and blasted overthrew.
I might relate of thousands, and thir names
Eternize here on Earth; but those elect
Angels contented with thir fame in Heav’n
Seek not the praise of men: the other sort
In might though wondrous and in Acts of Warr,

159

kidneys

pleases

unfamiliar

injure

350–3. Cf. 1.423–31.
limb themselves. Provide themselves with limbs, dense or aery.
355–6 might of Gabriel. Mighty Gabriel (Homeric diction).
Ensignes. Banners, which identify the
several divisions of troops.
array. Thick rows of troops.
365. Adramelec. King of fire, the Babylonian sun god worshiped in Samaria with human sacrifice (2 Kgs 17:31).
Asmadai. Asmodeus, creature of judgment, the evil spirit of the Apocryphal book of Tobit (see PL 4.168).
371–2 Ariel. “Lion of God.”
Arioc. “Lion-like.”
Ramiel. “Thunder of God,” one of the angels
fornicating with women in 1 Enoch 6:7. All three names are used of good and bad angels in rabbinical
and demonological texts.

160

380

385

390

395

400

405

410

415
 
Nor of Renown less eager, yet by doome
Canceld from Heav’n and sacred memorie,
Nameless in dark oblivion let them dwell.
For strength from Truth divided and from Just,
Illaudable,° naught merits but dispraise
And ignominie, yet to glorie aspires
Vain glorious, and through infamie seeks fame:
Therfore Eternal silence be thir doome.
And now thir Mightiest quelld, the battel swerv’d,°
With many an inrode gor’d;° deformed rout
Enter’d, and foul disorder; all the ground
With shiverd armour strow’n, and on a heap
Chariot and Charioter lay overturnd
And fierie foaming Steeds; what° stood, recoyld
Orewearied, through the faint Satanic Host
Defensive scarse, or with pale fear surpris’d,
Then first with fear surpris’d and sense of paine
Fled ignominious, to such evil brought
By sin of disobedience, till that hour
Not liable to fear or flight or paine.
Far otherwise th’ inviolable Saints°
In Cubic Phalanx° firm advanc’t entire,
Invulnerable, impenitrably arm’d:
Such high advantages thir innocence
Gave them above thir foes, not to have sinnd,
Not to have disobei’d; in fight they stood
Unwearied, unobnoxious° to be pain’d
By wound, though from thir place by violence mov’d.
Now Night her course began, and over Heav’n
Inducing darkness, grateful truce impos’d,
And silence on the odious dinn of Warr:
Under her Cloudie covert both retir’d,
Victor and Vanquisht: on the foughten field°
Michael and his Angels prevalent°
Encamping, plac’d in Guard thir Watches round,
Cherubic waving fires: on th’ other part
Satan with his rebellious disappeerd,
Far in the dark dislodg’d,° and void of rest,

383 ignominie. Literally, namelessness (Latin).
393 Defensive scarse. Scarcely able to defend themselves.

unworthy of praise

army fell back
passage penetrated

those who

angels
cube formation

not liable, unable

battlefield
victorious

shifted quarters

Book 6

420

425

430

435

440

445

450

His Potentates to Councel call’d by night;
And in the midst thus undismai’d began.
O now in danger tri’d, now known in Armes
Not to be overpowerd, Companions deare,
Found worthy not of Libertie alone,
Too mean pretense,° but what we more affect,°
Honour, Dominion, Glorie, and renowne,
Who have sustaind one day in doubtful° fight
(And if one day, why not Eternal dayes?)
What Heavens Lord had powerfullest to send
Against us from about his Throne, and judg’d
Sufficient to subdue us to his will,
But proves not so: then fallible, it seems,
Of future° we may deem him, though till now
Omniscient thought. True is, less firmly arm’d,
Some disadvantage we endur’d and paine,
Till now not known, but known as soon contemnd,
Since now we find this our Empyreal form
Incapable of mortal injurie
Imperishable, and though pierc’d with wound,
Soon closing, and by native vigour heal’d.
Of evil then so small as easie think
The remedie; perhaps more valid° Armes,
Weapons more violent, when next we meet,
May serve to better us, and worse° our foes,
Or equal what between us made the odds,
In Nature none: if other hidden cause
Left them Superiour, while we can preserve
Unhurt our mindes, and understanding sound,
Due search and consultation will disclose.
He sat; and in th’ assembly next upstood
Nisroc, of Principalities the prime;
As one he stood escap’t from cruel fight,
Sore toild, his riv’n° Armes to havoc hewn,
And cloudie in aspect thus answering spake.
Deliverer from new Lords, leader to free
Enjoyment of our right as Gods; yet hard

161

low aim / desire
indecisive

about the future

powerful
make worse, injure

cut to pieces

416. Nocturnal councils called by an army defeated in a battle are common in epic.
441–2 made the odds. Gave them the advantage, since “Nature” gives them none.
447 Nisroc. An Assyrian god worshiped by Sennacherib (2 Kgs 19:36 –7). His Hebrew name means “flight.”

162

455

460

465

470

475

480

485
 
For Gods, and too unequal work we find
Against unequal arms to fight in paine,
Against unpaind, impassive;° from which evil
Ruin must needs ensue; for what availes
Valour or strength, though matchless, quelld with pain
Which all subdues, and makes remiss° the hands
Of Mightiest. Sense of pleasure we may well
Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine,
But live content, which is the calmest life:
But pain is perfet miserie, the worst
Of evils, and excessive, overturnes
All patience. He who therefore can invent
With what more forcible we may offend°
Our yet unwounded Enemies, or arme
Our selves with like defence, to me° deserves
No less then for deliverance what we owe.
Whereto with look compos’d Satan repli’d.
Not uninvented that, which thou aright
Believst so main° to our success, I bring;
Which of us who beholds the bright surface
Of this Ethereous mould° whereon we stand,
This continent of spacious Heav’n, adornd
With Plant, Fruit, Flour Ambrosial, Gemms & Gold,
Whose Eye so superficially surveyes
These things, as not to mind° from whence they grow
Deep under ground, materials dark and crude,
Of spiritous and fierie spume, till toucht
With Heav’ns ray, and temperd they shoot forth
So beauteous, op’ning to the ambient° light.
These in thir dark Nativitie the Deep
Shall yield us pregnant with infernal° flame,
Which into hallow Engins° long and round
Thick-rammd, at th’ other bore with touch of fire
Dilated and infuriate shall send forth

not liable to suffer

slack, weak

injure, attack
in my opinion

essential
ethereal ground

remember, consider

enveloping
from underground
cannon

468. i.e., We would owe such a one our deliverance.
477–82 spiritous and fiery spume. See below, lines 511–12, “Sulphurous and Nitrous Foame”; these “dark
and crude” materials touched by “Heav’ns ray” become all the “beauteous” features of Heaven’s landscape (474–5). Satan proposes to mine these elements in their “dark Nativitie.”
485–6 Thick-rammd. Compactly packed.
bore. The touch-hole into which gunpowder is poured to
serve as fuse for the charge.
Dilated and infuriate. Exploding violently. Cannon and gunpowder
were often described as originating in hell.

Book 6

490

495

500

505

510

515

520

From far with thundring noise among our foes
Such implements of mischief as shall dash
To pieces, and orewhelm whatever stands
Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmd
The Thunderer of his only° dreaded bolt.
Nor long shall be our labour, yet ere dawne,
Effect shall end our wish. Mean while revive;
Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joind
Think nothing hard, much less to be despaird.
He ended, and his words thir drooping chere°
Enlightn’d, and thir languisht hope reviv’d.
Th’ invention all admir’d,° and each, how hee
To be th’ inventor miss’d, so easie it seemd
Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought
Impossible: yet haply° of thy Race
In future dayes, if Malice should abound,
Some one intent on mischief, or inspir’d
With dev’lish machination might devise
Like instrument to plague the Sons of men
For sin, on warr and mutual slaughter bent.
Forthwith from Councel to the work they flew,
None arguing stood, innumerable hands
Were ready, in a moment up they turnd
Wide the Celestial soile, and saw beneath
Th’ originals° of Nature in thir crude
Conception; Sulphurous and Nitrous° Foame
They found, they mingl’d, and with suttle Art,
Concocted° and adusted° they reduc’d
To blackest grain, and into store convey’d:
Part hidd’n veins diggd up (nor hath this Earth
Entrails unlike) of Mineral and Stone,
Whereof to found thir Engins and thir Balls
Of missive ruin; part incentive reed
Provide, pernicious° with one touch to fire.
So all ere day-spring,° under conscious° Night

163

unique

spirits
marvelled at

by chance

original elements
saltpeter
heated / dried

destructive
dawn / witnessing

493. i.e., we will achieve (“effect”) our “wish.”
515 blackest grain. Gunpowder; its ingredients are saltpeter and sulphur (512).
516–20 Part. Some of them cast (“found”) cannon and cannonballs (“Engins” and “Balls”) sending a message
of destruction (“missive ruin”), with a play on missile.
part. Some “Provide” the kindling (“incentive reed”) to ignite (“fire”) the cannon.

164

525

530

535

540

545

550

555
 
Secret they finish’d, and in order set,
With silent circumspection unespi’d.
Now when fair Morn Orient° in Heav’n appeerd
Up rose the Victor Angels, and to Arms
The matin° Trumpet Sung: in Arms they stood
Of Golden Panoplie,° refulgent° Host,
Soon banded; others from the dawning Hills
Lookd round, and Scouts each Coast light-armed scoure,
Each quarter, to descrie the distant foe,
Where lodg’d, or whither fled, or if for fight,
In motion or in alt:° him soon they met
Under spred Ensignes° moving nigh, in slow
But firm Battalion; back with speediest Sail
Zophiel, of Cherubim the swiftest wing,
Came flying, and in mid Aire aloud thus cri’d.
Arme, Warriours, Arme for fight, the foe at hand,
Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit
This day, fear not his flight; so thick a Cloud
He comes, and settl’d in his face I see
Sad° resolution and secure:° let each
His Adamantine° coat gird well, and each
Fit well his Helme, gripe fast his orbed Shield,
Born eevn° or high, for this day will pour down,
If I conjecture aught, no drizling showr,
But ratling storm of Arrows barbd with fire.
So warnd he them aware themselves, and soon
In order, quit of all impediment;°
Instant without disturb they took Allarm,
And onward move Embattelld;° when behold
Not distant far with heavie pace the Foe
Approaching gross° and huge; in hollow Cube
Training° his devilish Enginrie, impal’d°
On every side with shaddowing Squadrons Deep,
To hide the fraud. At interview° both stood
A while, but suddenly at head appeerd
Satan: And thus was heard Commanding loud.
Vanguard, to Right and Left the Front unfould;
That all may see who hate us, how we seek

535 Zophiel. Hebrew, “Spy of God.”
549 without disturb. Without loss of composure.

East
morning
full armor / shining

halt
battle flags

sober / confident
impenetrable
in front

military baggage
in battle formation
compact
hauling / fenced in
mutual view

took Allarm. Responded to the call to arms.

Book 6

165

560 Peace and composure, and with open brest

565

570

575

580

585

590

Stand readie to receive them, if they like
Our overture, and turn not back perverse;
But that I doubt, however witness Heaven,
Heav’n witness thou anon, while we discharge
Freely our part; yee who appointed stand
Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch
What we propound, and loud that all may hear.
So scoffing in ambiguous words, he scarce
Had ended; when to Right and Left the Front
Divided, and to either Flank retir’d.
Which to our eyes discoverd new and strange,
A triple mounted row° of Pillars laid
On Wheels (for like to Pillars most they seem’d
Or hollow’d bodies made of Oak or Firr
With branches lopt, in Wood or Mountain fell’d)
Brass, Iron, Stonie mould,° had not thir mouthes
With hideous orifice gap’t on us wide,
Portending hollow° truce; at each behind
A Seraph stood, and in his hand a Reed
Stood waving tipt with fire; while we suspense,°
Collected stood within our thoughts amus’d,°
Not long, for sudden all at once thir Reeds
Put forth, and to a narrow vent° appli’d
With nicest° touch. Immediate in a flame,
But soon obscur’d with smoak, all Heav’n appeerd,
From those deep throated Engins belcht, whose roar
Emboweld° with outragious noise the Air,
And all her entrails tore, disgorging foule
Thir devilish glut, chaind Thunderbolts and Hail
Of Iron Globes, which on the Victor Host
Level’d, with such impetuous furie smote,
That whom they hit, none on thir feet might stand,

in three tiers

composition
insincere
waiting
puzzled
touch hole
most exact

filled

560–7. The passage is full of puns, e.g., “Peace” (and piece, a weapon); “composure” (settlement of disputes
and construction [of weapons]); “brest” (heart/the forward line of a military formation); “overture” (offer
to negotiate/opening, the bore of the cannon); “discharge . . . charge” (perform our duty/fire our explosives); “appointed” (chosen/equipped); “touch” (state/ignite, touch off ); “propound” (propose/crush by
beating).
576–90. These lines contain numerous debased puns relating to bodily functions, e.g., “mouthes,” “orifice,”
“behind,” “narrow vent,” “deep throated,” “belcht,” “Emboweld,” “entrails,” “disgorging,” “glut,” “Iron
Globes.”
589 chaind Thunderbolts. Chain shot, cannonballs linked together.

166

595

600

605

610

615

620

625
 
Though standing else as Rocks, but down they fell
By thousands, Angel on Arch-Angel rowl’d;
The sooner for thir Arms, unarm’d they might
Have easily as Spirits evaded swift
By quick contraction or remove; but now
Foule dissipation° follow’d and forc’t rout;
Nor serv’d it to relax thir serried° files.
What should they do? if on they rusht, repulse
Repeated, and indecent° overthrow
Doubl’d, would render them yet more despis’d,
And to thir foes a laughter; for in view
Stood rankt of Seraphim another row
In posture to displode° thir second tire°
Of Thunder: back defeated to return
They worse abhorr’d. Satan beheld thir plight,
And to his Mates thus in derision call’d.
O Friends, why come not on these Victors proud?
Ere while they fierce were coming, and when wee,
To entertain them fair with open Front
And Brest, (what could we more?) propounded terms
Of composition, strait they chang’d thir minds,
Flew off, and into strange vagaries° fell,
As they would dance, yet for a dance they seemd
Somwhat extravagant and wilde, perhaps
For joy of offerd peace: but I suppose
If our proposals once again were heard
We should compel them to a quick result.
To whom thus Belial in like gamesom mood.
Leader, the terms we sent were terms of weight,
Of hard contents, and full of force urg’d home,
Such as we might perceive amus’d them all,
And stumbl’d many, who receives them right,
Had need from head to foot well understand;
Not understood, this gift they have besides,
They shew us when our foes walk not upright.

dispersal
close, tight
shameful, graceless

explode / volley

fantastic motions

611–12. More puns: “entertain” (welcome/engage an enemy); “open Front” (candid face/front rank of troops);
“Brest” (heart/forward line of a military company).
613 composition. Another pun (truce/composition of gunpowder).
621–7. Belial puns on “terms of weight” (solid negotiating terms/heavy cannonballs); “amus’d” (held their
attention/bewildered them); “stumbl’d” (nonplussed/tripped up); “understand” (comprehend/support); “walk
not upright” (deal dishonestly/cannot stand on their feet).

Book 6

630

635

640

645

650

655

660

665

So they among themselves in pleasant° veine
Stood scoffing, highthn’d in thir thoughts beyond
All doubt of Victorie, eternal might
To match with thir inventions they presum’d
So easie, and of his Thunder made a scorn,
And all his Host derided, while they stood
A while in trouble; but they stood not long,
Rage prompted them at length, and found them arms
Against such hellish mischief fit to oppose.
Forthwith (behold the excellence, the power
Which God hath in his mighty Angels plac’d)
Thir Arms away they threw, and to the Hills
(For Earth hath this variety from Heav’n
Of pleasure situate in Hill and Dale)
Light as the Lightning glimps they ran, they flew,
From thir foundations loosning to and fro
They pluckt the seated° Hills with all thir load,
Rocks, Waters, Woods, and by the shaggie tops
Up lifting bore them in thir hands: Amaze,°
Be sure, and terrour seis’d the rebel Host,
When coming towards them so dread° they saw
The bottom of the Mountains upward turn’d,
Till on those cursed Engins triple-row
They saw them whelm’d, and all thir confidence
Under the weight of Mountains buried deep,
Themselves invaded° next, and on thir heads
Main° Promontories flung, which in the Air
Came shadowing, and opprest° whole Legions arm’d,
Thir armor help’d thir harm, crush’t in and bruis’d
Into thir substance pent,° which wrought them pain
Implacable,° and many a dolorous groan,
Long strugling underneath, ere they could wind
Out of such prison, though Spirits of purest light,
Purest at first, now gross by sinning grown.
The rest in imitation to like Armes
Betook them, and the neighbouring Hills uptore;
So Hills amid the Air encounterd Hills
Hurl’d to and fro with jaculation° dire,
That under ground they fought in dismal shade;

167
jesting

fixed
astonishment
dreadful

attacked
massive, solid
pressed down
confined
impossible to relieve

the action of throwing

643–6. The hurling of “Hills” as missiles is taken from the war between the Olympian gods and the Titans
in Hesiod’s Theogony 713–20.

168

670

675

680

685

690

695

700
 
Infernal noise; Warr seem’d a civil° Game
To° this uproar; horrid confusion heapt
Upon confusion rose: and now all Heav’n
Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspred,
Had not th’ Almightie Father where he sits
Shrin’d in his Sanctuarie of Heav’n secure,
Consulting° on the sum of things, foreseen
This tumult, and permitted all, advis’d:°
That his great purpose he might so fulfill,
To honour his Anointed Son aveng’d
Upon his enemies, and to declare°
All power on him transferr’d: whence to his Son
Th’ Assessor° of his Throne he thus began.
Effulgence of my Glorie, Son belov’d,
Son in whose face invisible is beheld
Visibly, what by Deitie I am,
And in whose hand what by Decree I doe,
Second Omnipotence, two dayes are past,
Two dayes, as we compute the dayes of Heav’n,
Since Michael and his Powers went forth to tame
These disobedient; sore hath been thir fight,
As likeliest was, when two such Foes met arm’d;
For to themselves I left them, and thou knowst,
Equal in thir Creation they were form’d,
Save what sin hath impaird, which yet hath wrought
Insensibly,° for I suspend thir doom;
Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last
Endless, and no solution will be found:
Warr wearied hath perform’d what Warr can do,
And to disorder’d rage let loose the reines,
With Mountains as with Weapons arm’d, which makes
Wild work in Heav’n, and dangerous to the maine.°
Two dayes are therefore past, the third is thine;
For thee I have ordain’d it, and thus farr
Have sufferd,° that the Glorie may be thine
Of ending this great Warr, since none but Thou
Can end it. Into thee such Vertue and Grace

humane, civilized
compared to

deliberating
having considered

show forth
associate, sharer

imperceptibly

whole place

permitted

680–2 Effulgence. Radiance. cf. Heb. 1:3, describing the Son as “the brightness of his glory and the express
image of his person.”
invisible. Cf. Col. 1:15, “Who is the image of the invisible God.”
684 Second Omnipotence. Two omnipotences are a logical impossibility. Cf. John 5:19, “The Son can do
nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do,” a text Milton cites in Christian Doctrine 1.5, to argue
that the Son derives all power from the Father.

Book 6

705

710

715

720

725

730

735

740

Immense I have transfus’d, that all may know
In Heav’n and Hell thy Power above compare,
And this perverse Commotion governd thus,
To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir
Of all things, to be Heir and to be King
By Sacred Unction,° thy deserved right.
Go then thou Mightiest in thy Fathers might,
Ascend my Chariot, guide the rapid Wheeles
That shake Heav’ns basis,° bring forth all my Warr,
My Bow and Thunder, my Almightie Arms
Gird on, and Sword upon thy puissant Thigh;
Pursue these sons of Darkness, drive them out
From all Heav’ns bounds into the utter° Deep:
There let them learn, as likes them, to despise
God and Messiah his anointed King.
He said, and on his Son with Rayes direct
Shon full, he all his Father full exprest
Ineffably° into his face receiv’d,
And thus the filial Godhead answering spake.
O Father, O Supream of heav’nly Thrones,
First, Highest, Holiest, Best, thou alwayes seekst
To glorifie thy Son, I alwayes thee,
As is most just; this I my Glorie account,
My exaltation, and my whole delight,
That thou in me well pleas’d, declarst thy will
Fulfill’d, which to fulfil is all my bliss.
Scepter and Power, thy giving, I assume,
And gladlier shall resign, when in the end
Thou shalt be All in All, and I in thee
For ever, and in mee all whom thou lov’st:
But whom thou hat’st, I hate, and can put on
Thy terrors, as I put thy mildness on,
Image of thee in all things; and shall soon,
Armd with thy might, rid heav’n of these rebell’d,
To thir prepar’d ill Mansion driven down
To chains of darkness, and th’ undying Worm,
That from thy just obedience could revolt,

169

anointing

foundation

outer

inexpressibly, mysteriously

728–9. Cf. Matt. 3:17, “my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.”
731–3. Cf. 1 Cor. 15:24, 28: “Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God . . .
then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in
all” (See PL 3.339–41).
739 undying Worm. Cf. Mark 9:44: “[Hell is] Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.”

170

745

750

755

760

765

770
 
Whom to obey is happiness entire.
Then shall thy Saints unmixt, and from th’ impure
Farr separate, circling thy holy Mount
Unfeigned Halleluiahs to thee sing,
Hymns of high praise, and I among them chief.
So said, he o’re his Scepter bowing, rose
From the right hand of Glorie where he sate,
And the third sacred Morn began to shine
Dawning through Heav’n: forth rush’d with whirl-wind sound
The Chariot of Paternal Deitie,
Flashing thick flames, Wheele within Wheele undrawn,
It self instinct° with Spirit, but convoyd
By four Cherubic shapes, four Faces each
Had wondrous, as with Starrs thir bodies all
And Wings were set with Eyes, with Eyes the wheels
Of Beril, and careering° Fires between;
Over thir heads a chrystal Firmament,
Whereon a Saphir Throne, inlaid with pure
Amber, and colours of the showrie Arch°
Hee in Celestial Panoplie all armd
Of radiant Urim, work divinely wrought,
Ascended, at his right hand Victorie
Sate Eagle-wing’d, beside him hung his Bow
And Quiver with three-bolted Thunder stor’d,
And from about him fierce Effusion° rowld
Of smoak and bickering° flame, and sparkles dire;
Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints,
He onward came, farr off his coming shon,
And twentie thousand (I thir number heard)
Chariots of God, half on each hand were seen:
Hee on the wings of Cherub rode sublime°
On the Chrystallin Skie, in Saphir Thron’d.

animated by

moving back and forth

rainbow

copious emission
flickering

lifted up

750–61 Chariot of Paternal Deitie. The Son’s living chariot, with its four-faced Cherubim – the faces being
man, lion, ox (or cherub), and eagle – is taken from Ezek. 1 and 10. See especially 10:12, “And their whole
body, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes round about,
even the wheels that they four had.”
751 Undrawn. Moving by its own power.
761 Urim. Gems worn by the high priest Aaron on his breastplate of judgment (Exod. 28:30).
762–4 Victorie. Milton’s personification is based on Nike, the winged Greek goddess of victory, and on Jove’s
bird, the eagle.
three-bolted Thunder. Jove’s weapon is the three-forked thunderbolt.
769–72 Chariots of God. Cf. Ps. 68:17, “The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels:
the Lord is among them.”
wings of Cherub. Cf. Ps. 18:10, “And he rode upon a cherub.”
Saphir Thron’d. Cf. Ezek. 1:26, “the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone.”

Book 6

775

780

785

790

795

800

805

810

Illustrious° farr and wide, but by his own
First seen, them unexpected joy surpriz’d,
When the great Ensign of Messiah blaz’d
Aloft by Angels born, his Sign in Heav’n:
Under whose Conduct Michael soon reduc’d°
His Armie, circumfus’d° on either Wing,
Under thir Head imbodied all in one.
Before him Power Divine his way prepar’d;
At his command the uprooted Hills retir’d
Each to his place, they heard his voice and went
Obsequious,° Heav’n his wonted face renewd,
And with fresh Flourets Hill and Valley smil’d.
This saw his hapless Foes but stood obdur’d,°
And to rebellious fight rallied thir Powers
Insensate,° hope conceiving from despair.
In heav’nly Spirits could such perverseness dwell?
But to convince the proud what Signs availe,
Or Wonders move th’ obdurate to relent?
They hard’nd more by what might most reclame,
Grieving° to see his Glorie, at the sight
Took envie, and aspiring to his highth,
Stood reimbattell’d fierce, by force or fraud
Weening° to prosper, and at length prevaile
Against God and Messiah, or to fall
In universal ruin last, and now
To final Battel drew, disdaining flight,
Or faint retreat; when the great Son of God
To all his Host on either hand thus spake.
Stand still in bright array ye Saints, here stand
Ye Angels arm’d, this day from Battel rest;
Faithful hath been your warfare, and of God
Accepted, fearless in his righteous Cause,
And as ye have receivd, so have ye don
Invincibly; but of this cursed crew
The punishment to other hand belongs,
Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints;
Number to this dayes work is not ordain’d
Nor multitude, stand onely and behold

171
shining

led back
spread about

compliant
hardened
senseless

aggrieved

thinking

801–11 Stand still. Echoes Moses’ words when God destroyed the Egyptians in the Red Sea (Exod. 14:13):
“Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord which he will shew to you to day.”
808 Vengeance is his. Cf. Rom. 12:19, “Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord.”

172

815

820

825

830

835

840

845
 
Gods indignation on these Godless pourd
By mee, not you but mee they have despis’d,
Yet envied; against mee is all thir rage,
Because the Father, t’ whom in Heav’n supream
Kingdom and Power and Glorie appertains,
Hath honourd me according to his will.
Therefore to mee thir doom he hath assig’n’d;
That they may have thir wish, to trie with mee
In Battel which the stronger proves, they all,
Or I alone against them, since by strength
They measure all, of other excellence
Not emulous, nor care who them excells;
Nor other strife with them do I voutsafe.°
So spake the Son, and into terrour chang’d
His count’nance too severe to be beheld
And full of wrauth bent on his Enemies.
At once the Four spred out thir Starrie wings
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the Orbes
Of his fierce Chariot rowld, as with the sound
Of torrent Floods, or of a numerous Host.
Hee on his impious Foes right onward drove,
Gloomie° as Night; under his burning Wheeles
The stedfast Empyrean shook throughout,
All but the Throne it self of God. Full soon
Among them he arriv’d; in his right hand
Grasping ten thousand Thunders, which he sent
Before him, such as in thir Soules infix’d
Plagues; they astonisht° all resistance lost,
All courage; down thir idle weapons drop’d;
O’re Shields and Helmes, and helmed heads he rode
Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate,
That wisht the Mountains now might be again
Thrown on them as a shelter from his ire.
Nor less on either side tempestuous fell
His arrows, from the fourfold-visag’d Foure,
Distinct° with eyes, and from the living Wheels,

grant

dark

bewildered, stupefied

adorned

815 Kingdom and Power and Glorie. Cf. Matt. 6:13, “For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, for ever.”
827 the Four. The Four “Cherubic shapes” of line 753.
842–3 Mountains . . . shelter. Cf. Rev. 6:16, the cry of the damned to the mountains, “Fall on us, and hide
us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.”
845. See lines 753 and 827.

Book 6

850

855

860

865

870

875

880

Distinct alike with multitude of eyes,
One Spirit in them rul’d, and every eye
Glar’d lightning, and shot forth pernicious° fire
Among th’ accurst, that witherd all thir strength,
And of thir wonted° vigour left them draind,
Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fall’n.
Yet half his strength he put not forth, but check’d
His Thunder in mid Volie,° for he meant
Not to destroy, but root them out of Heav’n:
The overthrown he rais’d, and as a Heard
Of Goats or timerous flock together throngd
Drove them before him Thunder-struck, pursu’d
With terrors and with furies to the bounds
And Chrystal wall of Heav’n, which op’ning wide,
Rowld° inward, and a spacious Gap disclos’d
Into the wastful° Deep; the monstrous sight
Strook them with horror backward, but far worse
Urg’d them behind; headlong themselves they threw
Down from the verge of Heav’n, Eternal wrauth
Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.
Hell heard th’ unsufferable noise, Hell saw
Heav’n ruining° from Heav’n and would have fled
Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep
Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound.
Nine dayes they fell; confounded Chaos roard,
And felt tenfold confusion in thir fall
Through his wilde Anarchie, so huge a rout°
Incumberd° him with ruin: Hell at last
Yawning receavd them whole, and on them clos’d,
Hell thir fit habitation fraught with fire
Unquenchable, the house of woe and paine.
Disburdnd Heav’n rejoic’d, and soon repaird
Her mural° breach, returning whence it rowld.
Sole Victor from th’ expulsion of his Foes
Messiah his triumphal Chariot turnd:
To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood

173

destructive
accustomed

salvo

turned
desolate

falling

defeated army
burdened

in the wall

853. Cf. Hesiod’s Zeus, who put forth all his strength against the Titans (Theogony 687–9).
856–7 Heard / Of Goats. In the parable of the sheep and the goats, the latter were sent “into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels” (Matt. 25:33, 41).
871. In Hesiod’s Theogony (720–5) the Titans fell nine days from heaven to earth, and nine more days from
earth to Tartarus.

174

885

890

895

900

905

910
 
Eye witnesses of his Almightie Acts,
With Jubilie° advanc’d; and as they went,
Shaded with branching Palme, each order bright,
Sung Triumph, and him sung Victorious King,
Son, Heir, and Lord, to him Dominion giv’n,
Worthiest to Reign: he celebrated rode
Triumphant through mid Heav’n, into the Courts
And Temple of his mightie Father Thron’d
On high: who into Glorie him receav’d,
Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss.
Thus measuring things in Heav’n by things on Earth
At thy request, and that thou maist beware
By what is past, to thee I have reveal’d
What might have else to human Race bin hid;
The discord which befel, and Warr in Heav’n
Among th’ Angelic Powers,° and the deep fall
Of those too high aspiring, who rebelld
With Satan, hee who envies now thy state,
Who now is plotting how he may seduce
Thee also from obedience, that with him
Bereavd of happiness thou maist partake
His punishment, Eternal miserie;
Which would be all his solace and revenge,
As a despite don against the most High,
Thee once to gaine Companion of his woe.
But list’n not to his Temptations, warne
Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard
By terrible Example the reward
Of disobedience; firm they might have stood,
Yet fell; remember, and fear to transgress.

joyful shout

The End of the Sixth Book.

885 Palme. An emblem of victory, cf. Christ’s entry into Jerusalem (Matt. 21:5 – 9).
892 right hand. Cf. Heb. 1:2–3: “the Son . . . sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on High.”
909 weaker. Eve, as the “weaker vessel” (1 Pet. 3:7). She is present for this story, see PL 7.50 –1.

armies

BOOK 7
THE ARGUMENT
Raphael at the request of Adam relates how and wherefore this world was first created; that God, after the expelling of Satan and his Angels out of Heaven, declar’d
his pleasure to create another World and other Creatures to dwell therein; sends his
Son with Glory and attendance of Angels to perform the work of Creation in six
5 dayes: the Angels celebrate with Hymns the performance thereof, and his reascention into Heaven.

Descend from Heav’n Urania, by that name
If rightly thou art call’d, whose Voice divine
Following, above th’ Olympian Hill I soare,
Above the flight of Pegasean wing.
5 The meaning, not the Name I call: for thou
Nor of the Muses nine, nor on the top
Of old Olympus dwell’st, but Heav’nlie borne,
Before the Hills appeerd, or Fountain flow’d,
Thou with Eternal Wisdom didst converse,
10 Wisdom thy Sister, and with her didst play
In presence of th’ Almightie Father, pleas’d
With thy Celestial Song. Up led by thee
Into the Heav’n of Heav’ns I have presum’d,
An Earthlie Guest, and drawn Empyreal Aire,
15 Thy tempring;° with like safetie guided down
Return me to my Native Element:
Least from this flying Steed unrein’d, (as once
Bellerophon, though from a lower Clime)°

moderating

region

1–39. The third invocation or proem.
1 Descend from Heav’n. Echoes Horace’s invocation of the Muse Calliope, “Descende caelo” (Odes 3.4.1).
Urania. The classical Muse of astronomy who had been made into the Muse of Christian poetry by
Du Bartas and other religious poets (“Urania” means “heavenly”). Milton constructs another derivation for
her (5–12).
3 Olympian Hill. Mount Olympus, the home of the classical gods and Muses.
4 Pegasean. Pegasus, the winged horse of inspired poetry, had created the Muses’ spring, Hippocrene; he is
associated with Bellerophon (18–20 below, and note).
9–12 Eternal Wisdom. In Prov. 8:22–31 Wisdom tells of her activities before the Creation. “Then I was by
him [God], as one brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him.” Milton
devises a myth in which that “Wisdom” which is a personification of God’s wisdom is the “Sister” of Urania
as the Muse of divine poetry (“Celestial Song,” line 12); therefore, Urania also originates from God.
18–20 Bellerophon. He incurred the gods’ anger when he tried to fly to heaven on Pegasus. Zeus sent a gadfly
to sting the horse, and Bellerophon fell down to the “Aleian Field,” where he wandered “Erroneous” (translates “Aleian,” Greek for wandering), alone (“forlorne”), and in some accounts blind.

176

20

25

30

35

40

45
 
Dismounted, on th’ Aleian Field I fall
Erroneous there to wander and forlorne.
Half yet remaines unsung, but narrower bound
Within the visible Diurnal Spheare;
Standing on Earth, not rapt° above the Pole,
More safe I Sing with mortal voice, unchang’d
To hoarce or mute, though fall’n on evil dayes,
On evil dayes though fall’n, and evil tongues;
In darkness, and with dangers compast round,
And solitude; yet not alone, while thou
Visit’st my slumbers Nightly, or when Morn
Purples the East: still govern thou my Song,
Urania, and fit audience find, though few.
But drive farr off the barbarous dissonance
Of Bacchus and his revellers, the Race
Of that wilde Rout that tore the Thracian Bard
In Rhodope, where Woods and Rocks had Eares
To rapture, till the savage clamor dround
Both Harp and Voice; nor could the Muse defend
Her Son. So fail not thou, who thee implores:
For thou art Heav’nlie, shee an empty dreame.
Say Goddess, what ensu’d when Raphael,
The affable Arch-Angel, had forewarn’d
Adam by dire example to beware
Apostasie,° by what befell in Heaven
To those Apostates, least the like befall
In Paradise to Adam or his Race,
Charg’d not to touch the interdicted° Tree,
If they transgress, and slight that sole command,

transported, enraptured

renunciation of faith

forbidden

22 Diurnal Spheare. The universe, which seems to rotate daily, is the scene for the remainder of the epic.
25–8. After the Restoration of Charles II (May 1660) until the passage of the Act of Oblivion (August 1660),
Milton was in danger of death and dismemberment (like Orpheus, lines 34 –5). Several of his republican
colleagues were hanged, drawn, and quartered for their part in the revolution and regicide.
29–30. Milton’s early biographers report that he composed at night or in the early hours of the morning,
then waited for a scribe to take down his dictation.
32–7 Thracian Bard. Orpheus, the archtypal poet, whose “Harp and Voice” charmed even “Woods and Rocks,”
but were drowned out by the Bacchantes, a “wilde Rout” of screaming women who murdered and dismembered him in the “Rhodope” mountains in Thrace, and threw his body parts into the river Hebrus
(cf. “Lycidas,” 58–63). Milton fears that a similar “barbarous dissonance” unleashed by the Restoration
royalists will drown his voice and threaten his life.
37–8 Muse. Calliope, the Muse of epic poetry, was the mother of Orpheus.
40–50. The second epic question (paralleling 1.27–33), signals that Book 7 is the beginning, structurally, of
the poem’s second half; Virgil makes a similar gesture in Book 7 of the Aeneid.

Book 7

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

So easily obeyd amid the choice
Of all tastes else to please thir appetite,
Though wandring. He with his consorted° Eve
The storie heard attentive, and was fill’d
With admiration,° and deep Muse° to heare
Of things so high and strange, things to thir thought
So unimaginable as hate in Heav’n,
And Warr so neer the Peace of God in bliss
With such confusion: but the evil soon
Driv’n back redounded° as a flood on those
From whom it sprung, impossible to mix
With Blessedness. Whence Adam soon repeal’d°
The doubts that in his heart arose: and now
Led on, yet° sinless, with desire to know
What neerer might concern him, how this World
Of Heav’n and Earth conspicious° first began,
When, and whereof created, for what cause,
What within Eden or without was done
Before his memorie, as one whose drouth°
Yet scarce allay’d still eyes the current° streame,
Whose liquid murmur heard new thirst excites,
Proceeded thus to ask his Heav’nly Guest.
Great things, and full of wonder in our eares,
Farr differing from this World, thou hast reveal’d
Divine interpreter, by favour sent
Down from the Empyrean to forewarne
Us timely of what might else have bin our loss,
Unknown, which human knowledg could not reach:
For which to the infinitly Good we owe
Immortal thanks, and his admonishment
Receave with solemne purpose to observe
Immutably his sovran will, the end°
Of what we are. But since thou hast voutsaf ’t°
Gently for our instruction to impart
Things above Earthly thought, which yet concernd
Our knowing, as to highest wisdom seemd,
Deign to descend now lower, and relate
What may no less perhaps availe us known,
How first began this Heav’n which we behold
Distant so high, with moving Fires° adornd

177

wedded, accompanied
wonder / meditation

flowed back
abandoned
still
visible

thirst
flowing

purpose
granted

stars

72 Divine interpreter. Echoes Mercury’s title as messenger of the gods, “interpres divum” (Aeneid 4.378).

178

90

95

100

105

110

115

120
 
Innumerable, and this which yeelds or fills
All space, the ambient Aire wide interfus’d
Imbracing round this florid° Earth, what cause
Mov’d the Creator in his holy Rest
Through all Eternitie so late to build
In Chaos, and the work begun, how soon
Absolv’d,° if unforbid thou maist unfould
What wee, not to explore the secrets aske
Of his Eternal Empire, but the more
To magnifie° his works, the more we know.
And the great Light of Day yet wants to run
Much of his Race though steep, suspens° in Heav’n
Held by thy voice, thy potent voice he heares,
And longer will delay to heare thee tell
His Generation,° and the rising Birth
Of Nature from the unapparent Deep:
Or if the Starr of Eevning° and the Moon
Haste to thy audience, Night with her will bring
Silence, and Sleep listning to thee will watch°
Or we can bid his absence, till thy Song
End, and dismiss thee ere the Morning shine.
Thus Adam his illustrious Guest besought:
And thus the Godlike Angel answerd milde.
This also thy request with caution askt
Obtaine: though to recount Almightie works
What words or tongue of Seraph can suffice,
Or heart of man suffice to comprehend?
Yet what thou canst attain, which best may serve
To glorifie the Maker, and inferr°
Thee also happier, shall not be withheld
Thy hearing, such Commission from above
I have receav’d, to answer thy desire
Of knowledge within bounds; beyond abstain
To ask, nor let thine own inventions° hope

flourishing

finished

glorify
suspended, attentive

of his creation
Hesperus
stay awake

cause to be

speculations

88–9 ambient Aire. The surrounding air “yeelds” to solids or “fills” the spaces between them.
interfus’d. Interfusus, poured between (Latin).
90–3. Adam’s question about God’s actions before the Creation was often cited by theologians as an example of presumptuous and dangerous speculation, especially when, as here, it implies mutability in God.
But in Milton’s Eden error that is not deliberate is not sinful.
98–106. Pleas to continue a story are common in epic, see Odyssey 11.372 – 6, where Alcinous urges Odysseus
to continue speaking until dawn.
103 Deep. Chaos, invisible (“unapparent”) because dark and without form.

Book 7

125

130

135

140

145

150

Things not reveal’d, which th’ invisible King,
Onely Omniscient, hath supprest in Night,
To none communicable in Earth or Heaven:
Anough is left besides to search and know.
But Knowledge is as food, and needs no less
Her Temperance over Appetite, to know
In measure what the mind may well contain,
Oppresses else with Surfet, and soon turns
Wisdom to Folly, as Nourishment to Winde.
Know then, that after Lucifer from Heav’n
(So call him, brighter once amidst the Host
Of Angels, then that Starr the Starrs among)
Fell with his flaming Legions through the Deep
Into his place, and the great Son returnd
Victorious with his Saints,° th’ Omnipotent
Eternal Father from his Throne beheld
Thir multitude, and to his Son thus spake.
At least our envious Foe hath fail’d, who thought
All like himself rebellious, by whose aid
This inaccessible high strength, the seat
Of Deitie supream, us dispossest,
He trusted to have seis’d, and into fraud°
Drew many, whom thir place knows here no more;
Yet farr the greater part have kept, I see,
Thir station, Heav’n yet populous retaines
Number sufficient to possess her Realmes
Though wide, and this high Temple to frequent
With Ministeries due and solemn Rites:
But least his heart exalt him in the harme
Already done, to have dispeopl’d Heav’n
My damage fondly° deem’d, I can repaire
That detriment, if such it be to lose

179

angels

error, faithlessness

foolishly

126–30 Knowledge is as food. A commonplace. Cf. Davanant, Gondibert (1651): “For though books serve
as diet for the mind, / If knowledge, early got, self-value breeds, / By false digestion it is turned to wind,
/ And what would nourish on the eater feeds” (2.8.22–5).
131–3 Lucifer. Now known as Satan, he is brighter among the angels than the morning star of that name is
among the other stars.
142 us dispossest. Once he had dispossessed us (a Latinism).
144 thir place. Echoes Job 7:10, about the dead: “He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his
place know him any more.”
145 greater part. Cf. Satan’s conflicting representations of the numbers of the rebels (1.633, 6.156. 9.141–2)
and see 2.692.

180

155

160

165

170

175
 
Self-lost, and in a moment will create
Another World, out of one man a Race
Of men innumerable, there to dwell,
Not here, till by degrees of merit rais’d
They open to themselves at length the way
Up hither, under long obedience tri’d,
And Earth be chang’d to Heav’n, & Heav’n to Earth,
One Kingdom, Joy and Union without end.
Mean while inhabit laxe,° ye Powers of Heav’n,
And thou my Word, begotten Son, by thee
This I perform, speak thou, and be it don:
My overshadowing Spirit and might with thee
I send along, ride forth, and bid the Deep
Within appointed bounds be Heav’n and Earth,
Boundless the Deep, because I am who fill
Infinitude, nor vacuous the space.
Though I uncircumscrib’d my self retire,
And put not forth my goodness, which is free
To act or not, Necessitie and Chance
Approach not mee, and what I will is Fate.
So spake th’ Almightie, and to what he spake
His Word, the Filial Godhead, gave effect.
Immediate are the Acts of God, more swift

spread out

154 in a moment. See below, 176–8.
156–9 under long obedience tri’d. Cf. Raphael’s explanation of how man was intended to improve
(5.469–503). See Areopagitica on human nature and life in Eden: “many there be that complain of divin
Providence for suffering Adam to transgresse, foolish tongues! when God gave him reason, he gave him
freedom to choose, for reason is but choosing . . . God therefore left him free, set before him a provoking object, ever almost in his eyes; herein consisted his merit, herein the right of his reward, the praise of
his abstinence. Wherefore did he creat passions within us, pleasures round about us, but that these rightly
temper’d are the very ingredients of vertu?”
163–5. Milton’s God identifies himself as Creator and the Son as his agent, speaking his creating word;
cf. Christian Doctrine 1.5: “The Son . . . was the first of the whole creation, by whom afterwards all other
things were made.” The “Spirit” probably means the power of God, as Christian Doctrine 1.7 indicates.
168–73. Milton’s God creates out of Chaos, not out of nothing (ex nihilo) as most theologians held. The matter of Chaos emanated from God, and because God fills “Infinitude” Chaos (“the Deep”) is infinite. God
chooses when to “retire” or restrict his “goodness” (active power) to the empyreal heavens, leaving Chaos
subject to “Chance” and to other agents. God also freely chooses when to put forth that “goodness” into
Chaos and create heaven, the universe, and all creatures from it; his power is limited neither by
“Necessitie” nor “Chance,” which are causes of creation in some ancient philosophy (cf. Christian Doctrine
1.7; PL 2.955–1009, 10.282–305).
176–9. Raphael explains the principle of accommodation, whereby God’s acts, which are “Immediate” and
so described in some commentary on Genesis, are translated into the narrative terms humans can understand, here, a six-day Creation. This principle allows an escape from biblical literalism. Cf. the Creation
account given by Uriel to Satan disguised as a Cherub (3.705–21).

Book 7

180

185

190

195

200

205

210

Then time or motion, but to human ears
Cannot without process of speech be told,
So told as earthly notion° can receave.
Great triumph and rejoycing was in Heav’n
When such was heard declar’d the Almightie’s will;
Glorie they sung to the most High, good will
To future men, and in thir dwellings peace:
Glorie to him whose just avenging ire
Had driven out th’ ungodly from his sight
And th’ habitations of the just; to him
Glorie and praise, whose wisdom had ordain’d
Good out of evil to create, in stead
Of Spirits maligne a better Race to bring
Into thir vacant room, and thence diffuse
His good to Worlds° and Ages infinite.
So sang the Hierarchies:° Mean while the Son
On his great Expedition now appeer’d,
Girt with Omnipotence, with Radiance crown’d
Of Majestie Divine, Sapience° and Love
Immense, and all his Father in him shon.
About his Chariot numberless were pour’d°
Cherub and Seraph, Potentates and Thrones,
And Vertues, winged Spirits, and Chariots wing’d,
From the Armoury of God, where stand of old
Myriads between two brazen Mountains lodg’d
Against° a solemn day, harnest at hand,
Celestial Equipage;° and now came forth
Spontaneous, for within them Spirit livd,
Attendant on thir Lord: Heav’n op’nd wide
Her ever during° Gates, Harmonious sound
On golden Hinges moving, to let forth
The King of Glorie in his powerful Word
And Spirit coming to create new Worlds.
On heav’nly ground they stood, and from the shore
They view’d the vast immeasurable Abyss
Outrageous° as a Sea, dark, wasteful,° wilde,

181

human understanding

universes
angelic ranks

wisdom
arrayed, spread out

in preparation for
chariots with horses

everlasting

enormous, violent / desolate

182–3. Cf. Luke 2:14, the angels’ song at the birth of Jesus: “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace,
good will toward men.”
199–201 Chariots wing’d. Cf. Zech. 6:1, “behold, there came four chariots out from between two mountains . . . of brass.”
205–9 Harmonious sound. Cf. 2.880–1, and 565–8 below and note.

182

215

220

225

230

235

240
 
Up from the bottom turn’d by furious windes
And surging waves, as Mountains to assault
Heav’ns highth, and with the Center mix the Pole.
Silence, ye troubl’d waves, and thou Deep, peace,
Said then th’ Omnific° Word, your discord end:
Nor staid, but on the Wings of Cherubim
Uplifted, in Paternal Glorie rode
Farr into Chaos, and the World unborn;
For Chaos heard his voice: him all his Traine
Follow’d in bright procession to behold
Creation, and the wonders of his might.
Then staid the fervid° Wheeles, and in his hand
He took the golden Compasses, prepar’d
In Gods Eternal store, to circumscribe
This Universe, and all created things:
One foot he center’d, and the other turn’d
Round through the vast profunditie obscure,
And said, thus farr extend, thus farr thy bounds,
This be thy just° Circumference, O World.°
Thus God the Heav’n created, thus the Earth,
Matter unform’d and void: Darkness profound
Cover’d th’ Abyss: but on the watrie calme
His brooding wings the Spirit of God outspred,
And vital vertue° infus’d, and vital warmth
Throughout the fluid Mass, but downward purg’d
The black tartareous cold Infernal dregs
Adverse to life: then founded,° then conglob’d°
Like things to like, the rest to several place
Disparted,° and between spun out the Air,
And Earth self ballanc’t on her Center hung.
Let ther be Light, said God, and forthwith Light
Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure

all-creating

burning

exact / universe

life-giving power

formed / gathered into spheres
distributed

225 golden Compasses. Wisdom, in Prov. 8:27, declares, “When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when
he set a compass upon the face of the depth.”
233–5 Matter unform’d and void. Cf. Gen. 1:2, “And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness
was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.” Cf. PL 1.21–2.
237–8 tartareous. Crusty, gritty matter (“infernal dregs”), purged from the universe and associated with
Tartarus, hell.
243. God’s creating words, here and later, are quoted almost exactly from Gen. 1 (cf. chapters 1 and 2), but
Milton freely elaborates the creatures’ responses.
244 Ethereal. Ether was thought to be a fifth element or “quintessence,” the substance of the celestial bodies
above the moon.

Book 7

183

245 Sprung from the Deep, and from her Native East

250

255

260

265

270

275

To journie through the airie gloom began,
Sphear’d in a radiant Cloud, for yet the Sun
Was not; shee° in a cloudie Tabernacle°
Sojourn’d the while. God saw the Light was good;
And light from darkness by the Hemisphere
Divided: Light the Day, and Darkness Night
He nam’d. Thus was the first Day Eev’n and Morn:
Nor past uncelebrated, nor unsung
By the Celestial Quires, when Orient° Light
Exhaling° first from Darkness they beheld;
Birth-day of Heav’n° and Earth; with joy and shout
The hollow Universal Orb they fill’d,
And touch’d thir Golden Harps, and hymning prais’d
God and his works, Creatour him they sung,
Both when first Eevning was, and when first Morn.
Again, God said, let ther be Firmament
Amid the Waters, and let it divide
The Waters from the Waters: and God made
The Firmament, expanse of liquid, pure,
Transparent, Elemental Air, diffus’d
In circuit to the uttermost convex°
Of this great Round:° partition firm and sure,
The Waters underneath from those above
Dividing: for as Earth, so he the World
Built on circumfluous° Waters calme, in wide
Crystallin Ocean, and the loud misrule
Of Chaos farr remov’d, least fierce extreames
Contiguous might distemper° the whole frame:
And Heav’n° he nam’d the Firmament: So Eev’n
And Morning Chorus sung the second Day.
The Earth was form’d, but in the Womb as yet

light / temporary dwelling

shining
rising as vapor
the sky

vault
universe

flowing around

disturb
the sky

252 Eev’n and Morn. One twenty-four-hour period measured from sundown to sundown, in the Jewish
manner.
261–75 Firmament. The space between the earth and the outer shell (“uttermost convex”) of the universe,
filled with transparent air; it is the visible “Heav’n” or sky (274), not the ethereal heaven where God and
the angels reside. The “Waters underneath” are the oceans on which the earth rests; the waters “above”
are the “circumfluous Waters,” comprising a “Crystallin Ocean” that surrounds the outer shell of the universe; “Chaos” is thereby “farr remov’d” from creation.
276–81. Earth is at first an “Embryo” enveloped in a “Womb . . . / Of Waters”; then she is herself the “great
Mother” made ready (“Fermented”) to conceive and bear every other creature. Milton draws on
Lucretius, De Rerum Natura (2.991–8), for the concept of earth as Magna Mater and also on Ovid’s account
of Creation (Metamorphoses 1.1–51).

184

280

285

290

295

300

305

310

315
 
Of Waters, Embryon° immature involv’d,°
Appeer’d not: over all the face of Earth
Main° Ocean flow’d, not idle, but with warme
Prolific humour° soft’ning all her Globe,
Fermented the great Mother to conceave,
Satiate with genial° moisture, when God said
Be gather’d now ye Waters under Heav’n
Into one place, and let dry Land appeer.
Immediately the Mountains huge appeer
Emergent, and thir broad bare backs upheave
Into the Clouds, thir tops ascend the Skie:
So high as heav’d the tumid° Hills, so low
Down sunk a hollow bottom broad and deep,
Capacious bed of Waters: thither they
Hasted with glad precipitance,° uprowld
As drops on dust conglobing° from the drie;
Part rise in crystal Wall, or ridge direct,°
For haste; such flight the great command impress’d
On the swift flouds: as Armies at the call
Of Trumpet (for of Armies thou hast heard)
Troop to thir Standard, so the watrie throng,
Wave rowling° after Wave, where way they found,
If steep, with torrent rapture,° if through Plaine,
Soft-ebbing; nor withstood them Rock or Hill,
But they, or under ground, or circuit wide
With Serpent errour° wandring, found thir way,
And on the washie Oose deep Channels wore;
Easie, e’re God had bid the ground be drie,
All but within those banks, where Rivers now
Stream, and perpetual draw thir humid traine.°
The dry Land, Earth, and the great receptacle
Of congregated Waters he call’d Seas:
And saw that it was good, and said, Let th’ Earth
Put forth the verdant Grass, Herb yielding Seed,
And Fruit Tree yielding Fruit after her kind;
Whose Seed is in her self upon the Earth.
He scarce had said, when the bare Earth, till then
Desert and bare, unsightly, unadorn’d,
Brought forth the tender Grass, whose verdure clad
Her Universal Face with pleasant green,
Then Herbs of every leaf, that sudden flour’d
Op’ning thir various colours, and made gay

embyro / enfolded
continuous
life-producing liquid
generative

swollen

headlong fall
forming round shapes
throw up waves

billowing
powerful force

winding course

liquid currents

Book 7

320

325

330

335

340

345

350

Her bosom smelling sweet: and these scarce blown,°
Forth flourish’t thick the clustring Vine, forth crept
The swelling Gourd, up stood the cornie Reed
Embattell’d in her field: and the humble° Shrub,
And Bush with frizl’d hair implicit:° last
Rose as in Dance the stately Trees, and spred°
Thir branches hung with copious Fruit; or gemm’d°
Thir blossoms: with high woods the hills were crownd,
With tufts the vallies and each fountain side,
With borders long the Rivers. That Earth now
Seemd like to Heav’n, a seat where Gods might dwell,
Or wander with delight, and love to haunt
Her sacred shades: though God had yet not rain’d
Upon the Earth, and man to till the ground
None was, but from the Earth a dewie Mist
Went up and waterd all the ground, and each
Plant of the field, which e’re it was in the Earth
God made, and every Herb, before it grew
On the green stemm; God saw that it was good.
So Eev’n and Morn recorded the Third Day.
Again th’ Almightie spake: Let there be Lights
High in th’ expanse of Heaven° to divide
The Day from Night; and let them be for Signes,
For Seasons, and for Dayes, and circling Years,
And let them be for Lights as I ordaine
Thir Office in the Firmament of Heav’n
To give Light on the Earth; and it was so.
And God made two great Lights, great for thir use
To Man, the greater to have rule by Day,
The less by Night alterne:° and made the Starrs,
And set them in the Firmament of Heav’n
To illuminate the Earth, and rule the Day
In thir vicissitude,° and rule the Night,
And Light from Darkness to divide. God saw,
Surveying his great Work, that it was good:
For of Celestial Bodies first the Sun

185
blossomed

low-growing
tangled branches
put forth
adorned

the sky

in turns

alternation

321–2 cornie Reed. Stalks bearing grain; they appear as a forest of spears uplifted by a battalion
(“Embattell’d”). Cf. 4.980–3.
331–7. Cf. Gen. 2:5–6: “[God made] every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the
field before it grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man
to till the ground. But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.”

186
 
355 A mightie Spheare he fram’d, unlightsom first,

360

365

370

375

380

385

Though of Ethereal° Mould: then form’d the Moon
Globose, and every magnitude of Starrs,
And sowd with Starrs the Heav’n thick as a field:
Of Light by farr the greater part he took,
Transplanted from her cloudie Shrine, and plac’d
In the Suns Orb, made porous to receive
And drink the liquid Light, firm to retaine
Her gather’d beams, great Palace now of Light.
Hither as to thir Fountain other Starrs
Repairing, in thir gold’n Urns draw Light,
And hence the Morning Planet guilds her horns;
By tincture° or reflection they augment
Thir small peculiar,° though from human sight
So farr remote, with diminution seen.
First in the East his glorious Lamp was seen,
Regent of Day, and all th’ Horizon round
Invested with bright Rayes, jocond° to run
His Longitude through Heav’n’s high rode: the gray
Dawn, and the Pleiades before him danc’d
Shedding sweet influence: less bright the Moon,
But opposite in leveld° West was set
His mirror, with full face borrowing her Light
From him, for other light she needed none
In that aspect,° and still that distance keepes
Till night, then in the East her turn she shines,
Revolvd on Heav’ns great Axle, and her Reign
With thousand lesser Lights dividual° holds,
With thousand thousand Starres, that then appeer’d
Spangling the Hemisphere: then first adornd
With thir bright Luminaries that Set and Rose,
Glad Eevning and glad Morn crownd the fourth day.
And God said, let the Waters generate

fashioned from ether

infusion
own small light

merry

on the same plane

when full

divided, shared

360 cloudie Shrine. The “cloudie Tabernacle” (248 above) where light had been stored.
366 Morning Planet. probably Venus, which Galileo’s telescope found to be crescent-shaped (“guilds her
horns”) in her first quarter. The 1667 edition has “his horns” which would refer to Lucifer, who was named
by Raphael as the brightest star at 7.131 and is designated as the morning star in the Nativity Ode, 74.
The change accommodates Gallileo’s finding.
373 Longitude. Course round the ecliptic, from east to west (not the modern use of the term).
374–5 Pleiades. Seven daughters of Atlas, transformed to a cluster of stars known as the Seven Sisters; they
rise in the spring and are thought to shed fertility (“sweet influence”) into the earth. Cf. Job 38:31, “Canst
thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades.”

Book 7

390

395

400

405

410

415

420

Reptil with Spawn abundant, living Soule:
And let Fowle flie above the Earth, with wings
Displayd° on the op’n Firmament of Heav’n.
And God created the great Whales, and each
Soul living, each that crept, which plenteously
The waters generated by thir kindes,
And every Bird of wing after his kinde;
And saw that it was good, and bless’d them, saying,
Be fruitful, multiply, and in the Seas
And Lakes and running Streams the waters fill;
And let the Fowle be multiply’d on the Earth.
Forthwith the Sounds and Seas, each Creek and Bay
With Frie° innumerable swarme, and Shoales
Of Fish that with thir Finns and shining Scales
Glide under the green Wave, in Sculles that oft
Bank the mid Sea: part single or with mate
Graze the Sea weed thir pasture, and through Groves
Of Coral stray, or sporting with quick glance
Show to the Sun thir wav’d° coats dropt° with Gold,
Or in thir Pearlie shells at ease, attend°
Moist nutriment, or under Rocks thir food
In jointed Armour watch: on smooth° the Seale,
And bended° Dolphins play: part huge of bulk
Wallowing unweildie, enormous in thir Gate
Tempest° the Ocean: there Leviathan
Hugest of living Creatures, on the Deep
Stretcht like a Promontorie sleeps or swimmes,
And seems a moving Land, and at his Gilles
Draws in, and at his Trunck spouts out a Sea.
Mean while the tepid Caves, and Fens and shoares
Thir Brood as numerous hatch, from the Egg that soon
Bursting with kindly° rupture forth disclos’d
Thir callow young, but featherd soon and fledge
They summ’d thir Penns, and soaring th’ air sublime°
With clang° despis’d the ground, under a cloud

187

spread out

young fish

striped / flecked
watch for
stretch of calm water
curved in leaping
stir up violently

natural
aloft
harsh cry

388 Reptil. All creatures that crawl or creep. They are the first animate creatures, having a “living Soule.”
402–3. The fishes’ darting motions resemble boats (“Sculles”) oared now on one side, now on the other; as
they turn they seem to form a “Bank” within the sea.
412 Leviathan. The great whale (cf. 1.200–8).
420–1 callow. Unfeathered, but soon they have full plumage (“fledge”) and the wing feathers (“summ’d thir
Penns”) needed for flight.
422–3 despis’d. Looked down upon (the literal meaning); the ground seemed to be under a cloud of birds.

188

425

430

435

440

445

450

455
 
In prospect; there the Eagle and the Stork
On Cliffs and Cedar tops thir Eyries build:
Part loosly° wing the Region,° part more wise
In common, rang’d in figure wedge° thir way,
Intelligent° of seasons, and set forth
Thir Aierie Caravan high over Sea’s
Flying, and over Lands with mutual wing
Easing thir flight; so stears the prudent Crane
Her annual Voiage, born on Windes; the Aire,
Floats,° as they pass, fann’d with unnumber’d plumes:
From Branch to Branch the smaller Birds with song
Solac’d the Woods, and spred thir painted wings
Till Ev’n, nor then the solemn Nightingal
Ceas’d warbling, but all night tun’d her soft layes:
Others on Silver Lakes and Rivers Bath’d
Thir downie Brest; the Swan with Arched neck
Between her white wings mantling proudly, Rowes
Her state with Oarie feet: yet oft they quit
The Dank,° and rising on stiff Pennons,° towre°
The mid Aereal Skie: Others on ground
Walk’d firm; the crested Cock whose clarion° sounds
The silent hours, and th’ other° whose gay Traine
Adorns him, colour’d with the Florid hue
Of Rainbows and Starrie Eyes. The Waters thus
With Fish replenisht, and the Aire with Fowle,
Ev’ning and Morn solemniz’d the Fift day.
The Sixt, and of Creation last arose
With Eevning Harps and Mattin,° when God said,
Let th’ Earth bring forth Soul living in her kinde,
Cattel° and Creeping things, and Beast of the Earth,
Each in their kinde. The Earth obey’d, and strait
Op’ning her fertile Woomb teem’d° at a Birth
Innumerous° living Creatures, perfet formes,
Limb’d and full grown: out of the ground up rose
As from his Laire the wilde Beast where he wonns°
In Forrest wilde, in Thicket, Brake, or Den;
Among the Trees in Pairs they rose, they walk’d:

separately / sky
fly in wedge formation
understanding

undulates

water / wings / soar
shrill trumpet
the peacock

morning chant
domestic livestock
brought forth
numberless
dwells

429–30 mutual wing. Birds were thought to support each other when they fly in formation.
438–40. The swan’s outstretched (“mantling”) wings seem to form a cloak; it resembles a monarch on a
royal barge (“state”), rowing itself with its “Oarie” feet.

Book 7

189

460 The Cattel in the Fields and Meddowes green:

465

470

475

480

485

Those rare and solitarie, these in flocks
Pasturing at once, and in broad Herds upsprung.
The grassie Clods now Calv’d, now half appeer’d
The Tawnie Lion, pawing to get free
His hinder parts, then springs as broke from Bonds,
And Rampant shakes his Brinded° main; the Ounce,°
The Libbard,° and the Tyger, as the Moale
Rising, the crumbl’d Earth above them threw
In Hillocks; the swift Stag from under ground
Bore up his branching head: scarse from his mould
Behemoth biggest born of Earth upheav’d
His vastness: Fleec’t the Flocks and bleating rose,
As Plants: ambiguous° between Sea and Land
The River Horse and scalie Crocodile.
At once came forth whatever creeps the ground,
Insect or Worme; those wav’d thir limber fans
For wings, and smallest Lineaments exact
In all the Liveries dect of Summers pride
With spots of Gold and Purple, azure and green:
These as a line thir long dimension drew,
Streaking the ground with sinuous trace; not all
Minims° of Nature; some of Serpent kinde
Wondrous in length and corpulence involv’d°
Thir Snakie foulds, and added wings. First crept
The Parsimonious Emmet, provident
Of future, in small room large heart enclos’d,
Pattern of just equalitie perhaps
Hereafter, join’d in her popular Tribes
Of Commonaltie: swarming next appeer’d

streaked / lynx
leopard

amphibious

smallest animals
coiled

460–2 Those. The wild beasts who come forth “in Pairs” and spread out (“rare”) at wide intervals.
these. Domestic cattle, who come forth “in flocks” and “broad Herds,” and at once find pasture.
471 Behemoth. A huge biblical beast ( Job. 40:15–24), often identified with the elephant.
474 River Horse. Translates the Greek hippopotamus.
476 Worme. Any creeping creature, including serpents.
485–9 Parsimonious Emmet. The thrifty ant, with its capacious intellect (“large heart”) will become the
symbol of a frugal and self-governing republic (“Pattern of just equalitie”), with the “popular” (populous,
plebeian) tribes of common people (“Commonaltie”) joining in rule. In The Ready and Easy Way, Milton
makes ant colonies a symbol “of a frugal and self governing democratie or Commonwealth; safer and more
thriving in the joint providence and counsel of many industrious equals, then under the single domination of one imperious Lord.”
489–92 Deliciously. Bees here suggest delightful ease but become a symbol of monarchy associated with
Hell (1.768–75).

190
 
490 The Female Bee that feeds her Husband Drone

495

500

505

510

515

520

Deliciously, and builds her waxen Cells
With Honey stor’d: the rest are numberless,
And thou thir Natures know’st, & gav’st them Names,
Needless to thee repeated; nor unknown
The Serpent suttl’st Beast of all the field,
Of huge extent somtimes, with brazen Eyes
And hairie Main terrific,° though to thee
Not noxious,° but obedient at thy call.
Now Heav’n in all her Glorie shon, and rowld
Her motions, as the great first-Movers hand
First wheeld thir course; Earth in her rich attire
Consummate° lovly smil’d; Aire, Water, Earth,
By Fowl, Fish, Beast, was flown, was swum, was walkt
Frequent;° and of the Sixt day yet remain’d;
There wanted yet the Master work, the end°
Of all yet don; a Creature who not prone
And Brute as other Creatures, but endu’d
With Sanctitie of Reason, might erect
His Stature, and upright with Front° serene
Govern the rest, self-knowing, and from thence
Magnanimous to correspond with Heav’n,
But grateful to acknowledge whence his good
Descends, thither with heart and voice and eyes
Directed in Devotion, to adore
And worship God Supream, who made him chief
Of all his works: therefore the Omnipotent
Eternal Father (For where is not hee
Present) thus to his Son audibly spake.
Let us make now Man in our image, Man
In our similitude, and let them rule

terrifying
harmful

complete, perfect
in throngs, abundantly
purpose

brow, face

493. See PL 8.342–4 and Gen. 2:19–20.
495–7 hairie Main. Evokes the sea serpents (Aeneid 2.203–11) who emerged from the sea to destroy Laocoon
and his sons, and so was instrumental in the fall of Troy.
508–9 erect. Both “stand erect” and “elevate his condition.” His erect stance was understood to signify that
he was intended for Heaven; see 8.257–61.
511 Magnanimous. Noble, great-souled.
correspond. Both “be in harmony with” and “communicate
with.”
519–22 similitude. Likeness; cf. Gen. 1:26: “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.” The Geneva
Bible comments that humans were created “after God in righteousnes & true holines, meaning by these two
wordes all perfection, as wisdome, trueth, innocencie, power.” Commenting on Gen. 1:27, “So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them,” Milton
in Tetrachordon defines the divine image in man as “Wisdom, Purity, Justice, and rule over all creatures.”

Book 7

525

530

535

540

545

550

555

Over the Fish and Fowle of Sea and Aire,
Beast of the Field, and over all the Earth,
And every creeping thing that creeps the ground.
This said, he formd thee, Adam, thee O Man
Dust of the ground, and in thy nostrils breath’d
The breath of Life; in his own Image hee
Created thee, in the Image of God
Express,° and thou becam’st a living Soul.
Male he created thee, but thy consort
Female for Race;° then bless’d Mankinde, and said,
Be fruitful, multiplie, and fill the Earth,
Subdue it, and throughout Dominion hold
Over Fish of the Sea, and Fowle of the Aire,
And every living thing that moves on the Earth.
Wherever thus created, for no place
Is yet distinct by name, thence,° as thou know’st
He brought thee into this delicious° Grove,
This Garden, planted with the Trees of God,
Delectable both to behold and taste;
And freely all thir pleasant fruit for food
Gave thee, all sorts are here that all th’ Earth yields,
Varietie without end; but of the Tree
Which tasted works knowledge of Good and Evil,
Thou mai’st not; in the day thou eat’st, thou di’st;
Death is the penaltie impos’d, beware,
And govern well thy appetite, least sin
Surprise° thee, and her black attendant Death.
Here finish’d hee, and all that he had made
View’d, and behold all was entirely good;
So Ev’n and Morn accomplish’t the Sixt day:
Yet not till the Creator from his work
Desisting, though unwearied, up returnd
Up to the Heav’n of Heav’ns his high abode,
Thence to behold this new created World
Th’ addition of his Empire, how it shew’d
In prospect from his Throne, how good, how faire,
Answering his great Idea. Up he rode
Followd with acclamation and the sound

191

exact
propagation

from there
delightful

betray

524–8. Cf. Gen. 2:7: “And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.”
557 Idea. Eternal archetype or pattern, as in Plato; concept in the mind of God.

192

560

565

570

575

580

585

590

595
 
Symphonious of ten thousand Harpes that tun’d°
Angelic harmonies: the Earth, the Aire
Resounded, (thou remember’st for thou heardst)
The Heav’ns and all the Constellations rung,
The Planets in thir stations list’ning stood,
While the bright Pomp° ascended jubilant.
Open, ye everlasting Gates, they sung,
Open, ye Heav’ns, your living dores; let in
The great Creator from his work returnd
Magnificent, his Six days work, a World;
Open, and henceforth oft; for God will deigne
To visit oft the dwellings of just Men
Delighted, and with frequent intercourse°
Thither will send his winged Messengers
On errands of supernal° Grace. So sung
The glorious Train ascending: He through Heav’n,
That open’d wide her blazing° Portals, led
To Gods Eternal house direct the way,
A broad and ample rode, whose dust is Gold
And pavement Starrs, as Starrs to thee appeer,
Seen in the Galaxie, that Milkie way
Which nightly as a circling Zone° thou seest
Pouderd° with Starrs. And now on Earth the Seventh
Eev’ning arose in Eden, for the Sun
Was set, and twilight from the East came on,
Forerunning Night; when at the holy mount
Of Heav’ns high-seated top, th’ Impereal Throne
Of Godhead, fixt for ever firm and sure,
The Filial Power arriv’d, and sate him down
With his great Father, for he° also went
Invisible, yet staid (such priviledge
Hath Omnipresence) and the work ordain’d,
Author and end of all things, and from work
Now resting, bless’d and hallowd the Seav’nth day,
As resting on that day from all his work,
But not in silence holy kept; the Harp
Had work and rested not, the solemn Pipe,
And Dulcimer, all Organs° of sweet stop,
All sounds on Fret by String or Golden Wire

performed

triumphal procession

going back and forth
heavenly
radiant

belt
scattered thickly

the Father

wind instruments

565–7. Cf. Ps. 24:7: “Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors; and the King
of glory shall come in.” See lines 205–9 above.
596–7 Dulcimer. The Hebrew bagpipe (Dan. 3:5).
Fret. Bar on the fingerboard of a stringed instrument.

Book 7

600

605

610

615

620

625

630

Temper’d° soft Tunings,° intermixt with Voice
Choral° or Unison; of incense Clouds
Fuming from Golden Censers hid the Mount.
Creation and the Six dayes acts they sung,
Great are thy works, Jehovah, infinite
Thy power; what thought can measure thee or tongue
Relate thee; greater now in thy return
Then from the Giant Angels; thee that day
Thy Thunders magnifi’d; but to create
Is greater then created to destroy.
Who can impair thee, mighty King, or bound
Thy Empire? easily the proud attempt
Of Spirits apostat and thir Counsels vaine
Thou hast repeld, while impiously they thought
Thee to diminish, and from thee withdraw
The number of thy worshippers. Who seekes
To lessen thee, against his purpose serves
To manifest the more thy might: his evil
Thou usest, and from thence creat’st more good.
Witness this new-made World, another Heav’n
From Heaven Gate not farr, founded in view
On the cleer Hyaline, the Glassie Sea;
Of amplitude almost immense,° with Starr’s
Numerous, and every Starr perhaps a World
Of destind habitation; but thou know’st
Thir seasons: among these the seat of men,
Earth with her nether Ocean circumfus’d,°
Thir pleasant dwelling place. Thrice happie men,
And sons of men, whom God hath thus advanc’t,
Created in his Image, there to dwell
And worship him, and in reward to rule
Over his Works, on Earth, in Sea, or Air,
And multiply a Race of Worshippers

193
harmonized / sounds
in parts

immeasurable

surrounded

600 Golden Censers. Incense burners, cf. Rev. 8:3–4: “another angel came and stood at the altar, having a
golden censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all
the saints . . . And the smoke of the incense . . . ascended up before God.”
605 Giant Angels. This allusion to the Giants’ revolt against Jove implies that the Greek myth is a classical
type or version of the angels’ rebellion.
618–20 Hyaline. From the Greek for glass (Rev. 4:6, “a sea of glass like unto crystal”). The universe is constructed (“founded”) on this sea, the “Crystallin Ocean” above the firmament (see line 271 above), as opposed
to the “nether Ocean” (624), the earth’s seas.

194
 
Holy and just: thrice happie if they know
Thir happiness, and persevere upright.
So sung they, and the Empyrean rung,
With Halleluiahs: Thus was Sabbath kept.
635 And thy request think now fulfill’d, that ask’d
How first this World and face of things° began,
And what before thy memorie was don
From the beginning, that posteritie
Informd by thee might know; if else thou seek’st
640 Aught, not surpassing human measure, say.

outward form

The End of the Seventh Book.

631–2. Contrast Virgil, Georgics 2.458–9, on the happiness of farmers who live in harmony with an abundant
nature: “O happy husbandmen! too happy, should they come to know their blessings!”
634 Halleluiahs. Hebrew, Praise the Lord.

Figure 6

Illustration to Book 8, 1688 ( John Baptista Medina)

BOOK 8
THE ARGUMENT
Adam inquires concerning celestial Motions, is doubtfully answer’d, and exhorted to
search rather things more worthy of knowledg: Adam assents, and still desirous to detain
Raphael. relates to him what he remember’d since his own Creation, his placing in
Paradise, his talk with God concerning solitude and fit society, his first meeting and
5 Nuptials with Eve, his discourse with the Angel thereupon; who after admonitions
repeated departs.

5

10

15

20

The Angel ended, and in Adams Eare
So Charming° left his voice, that he a while
Thought him still speaking, still stood fixt to hear;
Then as new wak’t thus gratefully repli’d.
What thanks sufficient, or what recompence
Equal have I to render thee, Divine
Hystorian, who thus largely hast allayd
The thirst I had of knowledge, and voutsaf ’t
This friendly condescention° to relate
Things else by me unsearchable, now heard
With wonder, but delight, and, as is due,
With glorie attributed to the high
Creator; something yet of doubt remaines,
Which onely thy solution can resolve.
When I behold this goodly Frame, this World°
Of Heav’n and Earth consisting, and compute,
Thir magnitudes, this Earth a spot, a graine,
An Atom, with the Firmament compar’d
And all her numberd° Starrs, that seem to rowle
Spaces incomprehensible (for such
Thir distance argues and thir swift return
Diurnal)° meerly to officiate° light
Round this opacous° Earth, this punctual° spot,

spellbinding

courteous disregard of rank

universe

numerous

daily / minister
dark / pointlike

1 doubtfully. Ambiguously.
14. Introducing Raphael’s prototype of astronomical treatises, notably Galileo’s Dialogue Concerning the Two
Chief World Systems (Italian, 1632; Latin and English trans., 1635). Adam stands in the place of Galileo’s
Sagredo, an intelligent inquirer who seeks to be informed about the movement of the planets, while Raphael
takes on the role, first, of the Ptolemaic apologist (Simplicio), then of the Copernican (Salviati).
15–38. Relying on his senses, Adam assumes the universe is Ptolemaic, but finds logical difficulties in that
system. Cf. Eve’s question at 4:657–8, and Adam’s answer.

Book 8

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

One day and night; in all thir vast survey
Useless besides, reasoning I oft admire,°
How Nature wise and frugal could commit
Such disproportions, with superfluous hand
So many nobler Bodies to create,
Greater so manifold° to this one use,
For aught appeers,° and on thir Orbs impose
Such restless revolution day by day
Repeated, while the sedentarie° Earth,
That better might with farr less compass° move,
Serv’d by more noble then her self, attaines
Her end without least motion, and receaves,
As Tribute such a sumless° journey brought
Of incorporeal° speed, her warmth and light;
Speed, to describe whose swiftness Number failes.
So spake our Sire, and by his count’nance seemd
Entring on studious thoughts abstruse, which Eve
Perceaving where she sat retir’d in sight,
With lowliness Majestic from her seat,
And Grace that won who saw to wish her stay,
Rose, and went forth among her Fruits and Flours,
To visit° how they prosper’d, bud and bloom,
Her Nurserie;° they at her coming sprung
And toucht by her fair tendance gladlier grew.
Yet went she not, as not with such discourse
Delighted, or not capable her eare
Of what was high: such pleasure she reserv’d,
Adam relating, she sole Auditress;
Her Husband the Relater she preferr’d
Before the Angel, and of him to ask
Chose rather; hee, she knew would intermix
Grateful° digressions, and solve high dispute
With conjugal Caresses, from his Lip
Not Words alone pleas’d her. O when meet now
Such pairs, in Love and mutual Honour joyn’d?
With Goddess-like demeanour forth she went;
Not unattended, for on her as Queen

197

wonder

so much greater than
as it seems
motionless, slothful
roundabout course

incalculable
like that of spirits

inspect
objects of care, garden nursery

gratifying

52–7 preferr’d. The emphasis on Eve’s choice indicates that she is not bound by Paul’s prohibition in 1 Cor.
14:35, “If they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to
speak in the church,” but observes this hierarchical decorum for her own pleasure.

198

65

70

75

80

85
 
A pomp° of winning Graces waited still,°
And from about her shot Darts of desire
Into all Eyes to wish her still in sight.
And Raphael now to Adam’s doubt propos’d
Benevolent and facil° thus repli’d.
To ask or search I blame thee not, for Heav’n
Is as the Book of God before thee set,
Wherein to read his wondrous Works, and learne
His Seasons, Hours, or Dayes, or Months, or Yeares:
This to attain, whether Heav’n move or Earth,
Imports not, if thou reck’n right, the rest
From Man or Angel the great Architect
Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge
His secrets to be scann’d° by them who ought
Rather admire;° or if they list to try
Conjecture, he his Fabric° of the Heav’ns
Hath left to thir disputes, perhaps to move
His laughter at thir quaint° Opinions wide°
Hereafter, when they come to model Heav’n
And calculate° the Starrs, how they will weild°
The mightie frame, how build, unbuild, contrive
To save appeerances, how gird the Sphear
With Centric and Eccentric scribl’d o’re,
Cycle and Epicycle, Orb in Orb:
Alreadie by thy reasoning this I guess,
Who art to lead thy ofspring, and supposest
That bodies bright and greater should not serve
The less not bright, nor Heav’n such journies run,
Earth sitting still, when she alone receaves

retinue / continually

easy, affable

examined
marvel
edifice, frame
ingenious / wide of the mark
predict the motions of /direct

61 Graces. The attendants of Venus.
62–3 Darts of desire. The Petrarchan language identifies Eve’s graces as prompting desire, but the next line
redefines that desire in non-sexual terms.
67 Book of God. The Book of Nature, commonly understood as a second divine revelation.
71–5 the rest. Presumably, God’s purposes and designs throughout the whole universe (“His secrets”) – as
opposed to the specific factual issue, “whether Heav’n move or Earth” (70), which may be blamelessly
searched but which “Imports not” to a proper admiration of God’s “wondrous Works” (68).
82 save appeerances. Find ways of explaining discrepancies between their astronomical theories and the observed
movements of the heavenly bodies.
83–4 Eccentric. Off-center. In the Ptolemaic system, observed irregularities in the motion of heavenly bodies were first explained by hypothesizing orbits with the earth off-center, then by adding “Epicycles,” which
were smaller orbits whose centers ride on fixed points on the circumferences of the main orbits, and carry
the planets. The Copernican system also had some recourse to epicycles.

Book 8

199

90 The benefit: consider first, that Great

95

100

105

110

115

120

125

Or Bright inferrs° not Excellence: the Earth
Though, in comparison of Heav’n, so small,
Nor glistering,° may of solid good containe
More plenty then the Sun that barren shines,
Whose vertue on it self workes no effect,
But in the fruitful Earth; there first receavd
His beams, unactive° else, thir vigour find.
Yet not to Earth are those bright Luminaries
Officious,° but to thee Earths habitant.
And for the Heav’ns wide Circuit, let it speak
The Makers high magnificence, who built
So spacious, and his Line stretcht out so farr;
That Man may know he dwells not in his own;
An Edifice too large for him to fill,
Lodg’d in a small partition, and the rest
Ordain’d for uses to his Lord best known.
The swiftness of those Circles° attribute,
Though numberless,° to his Omnipotence,
That to corporeal substances could adde
Speed almost Spiritual;° mee thou thinkst not slow,
Who since the Morning hour set out from Heav’n
Where God resides, and ere mid-day arriv’d
In Eden, distance inexpressible
By Numbers that have name. But this I urge,
Admitting Motion in the Heav’ns, to shew
Invalid that which thee to doubt it mov’d;
Not that I so affirm, though so it seem
To thee who hast thy dwelling here on Earth.
God to remove his wayes from human sense,
Plac’d Heav’n from Earth so farr, that earthly sight,
If it presume, might erre in things too high,
And no advantage gaine. What if the Sun
Be Center to the World,° and other Starrs
By his attractive vertue° and their own
Incited, dance about him various rounds?°

implies
gleaming

ineffective
attentive, dutiful

planets, orbits
incalculable
as that of angels

universe
power, magnetism
circular dances

90. Raphael here begins his rationale for the Ptolemaic system.
117–18 Not that I so affirm. Raphael refuses to “reveal” astronomical truth to Adam, leaving that matter
open to human scientific speculation. He suggests that Adam’s Ptolemaic assumptions result from his earthbound perspective, and implies that angels from their perspective see the cosmos in other terms.
122–58. Raphael now argues the case for Copernican astronomy and introduces still more advanced scientific
notions that Adam had not imagined – multiple universes and other inhabited planets.

200

130

135

140

145

150
 
Thir wandring course now high, now low, then hid,
Progressive, retrograde, or standing still,
In six thou seest, and what if sev’nth to these
The Planet Earth, so stedfast though she seem,
Insensibly three different Motions move?
Which else to several Spheres thou must ascribe,
Mov’d contrarie with thwart obliquities,
Or save the Sun his labour, and that swift
Nocturnal and Diurnal rhomb suppos’d,
Invisible else above all Starrs, the Wheele
Of Day and Night; which needs not thy beleefe,
If Earth industrious of her self fetch Day
Travelling East, and with her part averse
From the Suns beam meet Night, her other part
Still luminous by his ray. What if that light
Sent from her through the wide transpicuous° aire,
To the terrestrial Moon° be as a Starr
Enlightning her by Day, as she by Night
This Earth? reciprocal, if Land be there,
Feilds and Inhabitants: Her spots thou seest
As Clouds, and Clouds may rain, and Rain produce
Fruits in her soft’nd Soile, for some to eate
Allotted there; and other Suns perhaps
With thir attendant Moons thou wilt descrie
Communicating Male and Femal Light,
Which two great Sexes animate the World,

transparent
earth’s moon

126 wandring. Elliptical. The word planet comes from the Greek word for wanderer.
127 Progressive. Moving west to east.
retrograde. Moving east to west (contrary to the order of the
zodiac signs).
128 six. The six planets we see move: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, and the moon. Raphael suggests
that “the Planet Earth” rather than the sun may be the “sev’nth,” moving imperceptibly (“Insensibly”).
130 three differrent Motions. According to Copernicus the three motions are daily rotation, annual revolution around the sun, and “motion in declination” to align the earth’s axis always with the same point
in the celestial sphere.
132 thwart obliquities. Irregular and “contrarie” paths that cross each other, which, if the earth doesn’t rotate,
you must “else” ascribe to the planets (131).
133–6 rhomb. Greek, wheel. The invisible tenth or outer sphere (Primum Mobile), “suppos’d” by Ptolemaic
astronomers to revolve every twenty-four hours (“Nocturnal and Diurnal”) carrying the planets with it; this
concept is necessary if you would “save the Sun his labour,” but if the earth rotates it “needs not thy beleefe.”
148–9 Moons. Planets “attendant” upon a sun; they exchange reflected light reciprocally but also have some
“peculiar” light of their own (7.368). Galileo had discovered four of the moons of Jupiter.
150–1 Male and Femal Light. The sun and moon had long been gendered, through association of the sun
with Apollo and the moon with Diana; here their light is imagined to be a sexually active force, “perhaps”
endowing the several planets with life (“animate”).

Book 8

155

160

165

170

175

180

185

Stor’d in each Orb perhaps with some that live.
For such vast room in Nature unpossest
By living Soule, desert and desolate,
Onely to shine, yet scarce to contribute
Each Orb a glimps of Light, conveyd so farr
Down to this habitable,° which returnes
Light back to them, is obvious° to dispute.
But whether thus these things, or whether not,
Whether the Sun predominant in Heav’n
Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the Sun,
Hee from the East his flaming rode begin,
Or Shee from West her silent course advance
With inoffensive° pace that spinning sleeps
On her soft Axle, while she paces Eev’n,
And beares thee soft with the smooth Air along,
Sollicit° not thy thoughts with matters hid,
Leave them to God above, him serve and feare;
Of other Creatures, as him pleases best,
Wherever plac’t, let him dispose: joy thou
In what he gives to thee, this Paradise
And thy faire Eve; Heav’n is for thee too high
To know what passes there; be lowlie wise:
Think onely what concernes thee and thy being;
Dream not of other Worlds, what Creatures there
Live, in what state, condition or degree,
Contented that thus farr hath been reveal’d
Not of Earth onely but of highest Heav’n.
To whom thus Adam cleerd of doubt, repli’d.
How fully hast thou satisfi’d me, pure
Intelligence° of Heav’n, Angel serene,
And freed from intricacies, taught to live
The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts
To interrupt the sweet of Life, from which
God hath bid dwell farr off all anxious cares,
And not molest us, unless we our selves
Seek them with wandring thoughts, and notions vain.
But apt the Mind or Fancie is to roave
Uncheckt, and of her roaving is no end;

201

inhabited place, earth
open

unobstructed, harmless

disturb, unsettle

spirit

152. Bruno and Descartes were among those who accepted the idea that suns, planets, and moons were inhabited; Kepler rejected the idea.
187–9. Cf. Belial’s “thoughts that wander through Eternity” (2.148).

202
 
190 Till warn’d, or by experience taught, she learne,

195

200

205

210

215

220

225

That not to know at large of things remote
From use, obscure and suttle, but to know
That which before us lies in daily life,
Is the prime Wisdom, what is more, is fume,°
Or emptiness, or fond impertinence,°
And renders us in things that most concerne
Unpractis’d, unprepar’d, and still to seek.°
Therefore from this high pitch° let us descend
A lower flight, and speak of things at hand
Useful, whence haply° mention may arise
Of somthing not unseasonable to ask
By sufferance,° and thy wonted° favour deign’d.
Thee I have heard relating what was don
Ere my remembrance: now hear mee relate
My Storie, which perhaps thou hast not heard;
And Day is yet not spent; till then thou seest
How suttly to detaine thee I devise,
Inviting thee to hear while I relate,
Fond,° were it not in hope of thy reply:
For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heav’n,
And sweeter thy discourse is to my eare
Then Fruits of Palm-tree pleasantest to thirst
And hunger both, from labour, at the houre
Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill,
Though pleasant, but thy words with Grace Divine
Imbu’d, bring to thir sweetness no satietie.
To whom thus Raphael answer’d heav’nly meek.
Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men,
Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee
Abundantly his gifts hath also pour’d
Inward and outward both, his image faire:
Speaking or mute all comliness and grace
Attends thee, and each word, each motion formes,
Nor less think wee in Heav’n of thee on Earth
Then of our fellow servant, and inquire
Gladly into the wayes of God with Man:
For God we see hath honour’d thee, and set
On Man his Equal Love: say therefore on;
For I that Day was absent, as befell,°

225. In Rev. 22:9 an angel says to St. John, “I am thy fellowservant.”

vapor
foolish irrelevance
always seeking
summit
perhaps
permission / usual

foolish

as it happened

Book 8
230 Bound on a voyage uncouth° and obscure,

235

240

245

250

255

260

265

Farr on excursion toward the Gates of Hell;
Squar’d° in full Legion (such command we had)
To see that none thence issu’d forth a spie,
Or enemie, while God was in his work,
Least hee incenst at such eruption bold,
Destruction with Creation might have mixt.
Not that they durst without his leave attempt,
But us he sends upon his high behests
For state,° as Sovran King, and to enure°
Our prompt obedience. Fast we found, fast shut
The dismal Gates, and barricado’d° strong;
But long ere our approaching heard within
Noise, other then the sound of Dance or Song,
Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage.
Glad we return’d up to the coasts of Light
Ere Sabbath Eev’ning: so we had in charge.
But thy relation now; for I attend,
Pleas’d with thy words no less then thou with mine.
So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire.
For Man to tell how human Life began
Is hard; for who himself beginning knew?
Desire with thee still longer to converse
Induc’d me. As new wak’t from soundest sleep
Soft on the flourie herb° I found me laid
In Balmie° Sweat, which with his Beames the Sun
Soon dri’d, and on the reaking° moisture fed.
Strait toward Heav’n my wondring Eyes I turnd,
And gaz’d a while the ample Skie, till rais’d
By quick instinctive motion up I sprung,
As thitherward endevoring, and upright
Stood on my feet; about me round I saw
Hill, Dale, and shadie Woods, and sunnie Plaines,
And liquid Lapse° of murmuring Streams; by these,
Creatures that livd, and movd, and walk’d, or flew,
Birds on the branches warbling; all things smil’d,
With fragrance and with joy my heart oreflow’d.
My self I then perus’d, and Limb by Limb

203
strange, unfamiliar
in square formation

ceremony / strengthen
barred

grass with flowers
fragrant
steaming

gliding flow

250–333. Cf. Eve’s recollection of her earliest moments of consciousness (4.449 –76).
250–1. Cf. Satan’s inability to remember his creation (5.859–63) and the very different inference he draws
from that fact.

204

270

275

280

285

290

295

300
 
Survey’d, and sometimes went,° and sometimes ran
With supple joints, as lively vigour led:
But who I was, or where, or from what cause,
Knew not; to speak I tri’d, and forthwith spake,
My Tongue obey’d and readily could name
What e’re I saw. Thou Sun, said I, faire Light,
And thou enlight’nd Earth, so fresh and gay,°
Ye Hills and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods, and Plaines,
And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell,
Tell, if ye saw, how came I thus, how here?
Not of my self; by some great Maker then,
In goodness and in power præeminent;
Tell me, how may I know him, how adore,
From whom I have that thus I move and live,
And feel that I am happier then I know.
While thus I call’d, and stray’d I knew not whither,
From where I first drew Aire, and first beheld
This happie Light, when answer none return’d,
On a green shadie Bank profuse of Flours
Pensive I sate me down; there gentle sleep
First found me, and with soft oppression° seis’d
My droused sense, untroubl’d, though I thought
I then was passing to my former state
Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve:
When suddenly stood at my Head a dream,
Whose inward apparition gently mov’d
My fancy to believe I yet had being,
And livd: One came, methought, of shape Divine,
And said, thy Mansion wants° thee, Adam, rise,
First Man, of Men innumerable ordain’d
First Father, call’d by thee I come thy Guide
To the Garden of bliss, thy seat° prepar’d.
So saying, by the hand he took me rais’d,
And over Fields and Waters, as in Aire
Smooth sliding without step, last led me up

walked

brightly colored

pressure

lacks

residence

271–3. Many exegetes speculated that Adam spontaneously spoke Hebrew; Milton in his Art of Logic did not
specify the language but wrote that it was “without doubt divinely given.” Adam’s ability to name the
creatures was taken to indicate his intuitive understanding of their natures.
273–82. Adam instinctively works out the central principles of natural theology: that there is a Creator and
that he should be adored.
292 at my Head a dream. In the Iliad (2.20) a dream sent by Zeus in the guise of Nestor stands at
Agamemnon’s head. Compare Eve’s dream (4.800–9, 5.30 – 93).

Book 8

305

310

315

320

325

330

335

340

A woodie Mountain; whose high top was plaine,
A Circuit wide, enclos’d, with goodliest Trees
Planted, with Walks, and Bowers, that what I saw
Of Earth before scarce pleasant seemd. Each Tree
Load’n with fairest Fruit, that hung to the Eye
Tempting, stirr’d in me sudden appetite
To pluck and eate; whereat I wak’d, and found
Before mine Eyes all real, as the dream
Had lively° shadowd: Here had new begun
My wandring, had not hee who was my Guide
Up hither, from among the Trees appeer’d
Presence Divine. Rejoycing, but with aw
In adoration at his feet I fell
Submiss: he rear’d me, and Whom thou soughtst I am,
Said mildely, Author of all this thou seest
Above, or round about thee or beneath.
This Paradise I give thee, count it thine
To Till and keep,° and of the Fruit to eate:
Of every Tree that in the Garden growes
Eate freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth:
But of the Tree whose operation° brings
Knowledg of good and ill, which I have set
The Pledge of thy Obedience and thy Faith,
Amid the Garden by the Tree of Life,
Remember what I warne thee, shun to taste,
And shun the bitter consequence: for know,
The day thou eat’st thereof, my sole command
Transgrest, inevitably thou shalt dye;
From that day mortal, and this happie State
Shalt loose, expell’d from hence into a World
Of woe and sorrow. Sternly he pronounc’d
The rigid interdiction,° which resounds
Yet dreadful in mine eare, though in my choice
Not to incur; but soon his cleer aspect°
Return’d and gracious purpose° thus renew’d.
Not onely these fair bounds, but all the Earth
To thee and to thy Race I give; as Lords
Possess it, and all things that therein live,
Or live in Sea, or Aire, Beast, Fish, and Fowle.
In signe whereof each Bird and Beast behold

319–33. Cf. Gen. 1:29–30 and 2:16–17.

205

realistically, vividly

care for

effect

prohibition
benign look
discourse

206

345

350

355

360

365

370

375
 
After thir kindes; I bring them to receave
From thee thir Names, and pay thee fealtie
With low subjection; understand the same
Of Fish within thir watry residence,
Not hither summon’d, since they cannot change
Thir Element to draw the thinner Aire.
As thus he spake, each Bird and Beast behold
Approaching two and two, These° cowring° low
With blandishment, each Bird stoop’d on his wing.
I nam’d them, as they pass’d, and understood
Thir Nature, with such knowledg God endu’d
My sudden apprehension: but in these
I found not what me thought I wanted still;
And to the Heav’nly vision thus presum’d.°
O by what Name, for thou above all these,
Above mankinde, or aught then mankinde higher,
Surpassest farr my naming, how may I
Adore thee, Author of this Universe,
And all this good to man, for whose well being
So amply, and with hands so liberal
Thou hast provided all things: but with mee
I see not who partakes. In solitude
What happiness, who can enjoy alone,
Or all enjoying, what contentment find?
Thus I presumptuous; and the vision bright,
As with a smile more bright’nd, thus repli’d.
What call’st thou solitude, is not the Earth
With various living creatures, and the Aire
Replenisht,° and all these at thy command
To come and play before thee, know’st thou not
Thir language and thir wayes, they also know,
And reason not contemptibly; with these
Find pastime, and beare rule; thy Realm is large.
So spake the Universal Lord, and seem’d
So ordering. I with leave of speech implor’d,
And humble deprecation° thus repli’d.

the beasts / bowing

dared to speak

fully stocked

intercession

351. blandishment. Flattering gestures.
stoop’d. Bowed.
352–4. Adam has already named the sun and features of the earth (272–3); here he names, and thereby understands by intuition (“sudden apprehension”), all living creatures.
357–60. Adam cannot name, and thereby indicates that he cannot understand, God, except as God reveals
himself.

Book 8

380

385

390

395

400

405

410

415

Let not my words offend thee, Heav’nly Power,
My Maker, be propitious° while I speak.
Hast thou not made me here thy substitute,°
And these inferiour farr beneath me set?
Among unequals what societie°
Can sort,° what harmonie or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Giv’n and receiv’d; but in disparitie
The one intense, the other still remiss
Cannot well suite with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike: Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate°
All rational delight, wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort; they rejoyce
Each with thir kinde, Lion with Lioness;
So fitly them in pairs thou hast combin’d;
Much less can Bird with Beast, or Fish with Fowle
So well converse,° nor with the Ox the Ape;
Wors then can Man with Beast, and least of all.
Whereto th’ Almighty answer’d, not displeas’d.
A nice° and suttle happiness I see
Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice
Of thy Associates, Adam, and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitarie.
What think’st thou then of mee, and this my State,
Seem I to thee sufficiently possest
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all Eternitie, for none I know
Second to mee or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse
Save with the Creatures which I made, and those
To me inferiour, infinite descents
Beneath what other Creatures are to thee?
He ceas’d, I lowly answer’d. To attaine
The highth and depth of thy Eternal wayes
All human thoughts come short, Supream of things;
Thou in thy self art perfet, and in thee

207

gracious
deputy
companionship
suit, be fitting

share

associate

discriminating

384–8 harmonie. As with poorly matched musical instruments, Adam’s string is too taut (“intense”) and the
animals’ string is too slack (“remiss”) to be in harmony (“suite”).
402 pleasure. “Eden” is Hebrew for “pleasure.”
415–17 perfet. God is absolutely perfect, man is perfect only “in degree,” relatively.

208

420

425

430

435

440

445
 
Is no deficience found; not so is Man,
But° in degree, the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help,
Or solace° his defects. No need that thou
Shouldst propagat, already infinite;
And through all numbers absolute, though One;
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his Image multipli’d,
In unitie° defective, which requires
Collateral° love, and deerest amitie.
Thou in thy secresie° although alone,
Best with thy self accompanied, seek’st not
Social communication, yet so pleas’d,
Canst raise thy Creature to what highth thou wilt
Of Union or Communion, deifi’d;
I by conversing cannot these erect
From prone, nor in thir wayes complacence° find.
Thus I embold’nd spake, and freedom us’d
Permissive,° and acceptance found, which gain’d
This answer from the gratious voice Divine.
Thus farr to try thee, Adam, I was pleas’d,
And finde thee knowing not of Beasts alone,
Which thou hast rightly nam’d, but of thy self,
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My Image, not imparted to the Brute,
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet° for thee
Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike,
And be so minded still; I, ere thou spak’st,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone,
And no such companie as then thou saw’st
Intended thee, for trial onely brought,

except
alleviate, assuage

singleness
mutual
seclusion

satisfaction, pleasure
allowed

unsuitable

421. God, though One, contains all numbers.
423 single imperfection. The imperfection of being alone; humans need to perfect themselves through social
intercourse (“by number”).
431 deifi’d. Made, by grace, able to rise to “Union or Communion” with God.
437 try. God has played the role of a Socratic teacher, offering Adam erroneous formulations and thereby
prodding him to discover for himself essential truths about human nature.
444–50. Cf. Gen. 2:18: “And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him
an help meet for him.” Milton’s gloss on “help meet” in Tetrachordon, “God as it were not satisfy’d with
the naming of a help, goes on describing another self, a second self, a very self it self,” and God’s words in the
epic, “Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,” reinforce Milton’s ideal of companionate marriage. These
words even seem to posit gender equality, by contrast to the hierarchy affirmed elsewhere.

Book 8

450

455

460

465

470

475

480

To see how thou could’st judge of fit and meet:
What next I bring shall please thee, be assur’d,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,
Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire.
Hee ended, or I heard no more, for now
My earthly° by his Heav’nly overpowerd,
Which it had long stood under,° streind to the highth
In that celestial Colloquie sublime,
As with an object that excels° the sense,
Dazl’d and spent, sunk down, and sought repair
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, call’d
By Nature as in aide, and clos’d mine eyes.
Mine eyes he clos’d, but op’n left the Cell
Of Fancie my internal sight, by which
Abstract° as in a transe methought I saw,
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape
Still glorious before whom awake I stood;
Who stooping op’nd my left side, and took
From thence a Rib, with cordial spirits warme,
And Life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound,
But suddenly with flesh fill’d up and heal’d:
The Rib he formd and fashond with his hands;
Under his forming hands a Creature grew,
Manlike, but different Sex, so lovly faire,
That what seemd fair in all the World, seemd now
Mean, or in her summ’d up, in her containd
And in her looks, which from that time infus’d
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
And into all things from her Aire° inspir’d°
The spirit of love and amorous delight.
Shee disappeerd, and left me dark, I wak’d
To find her, or for ever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:
When out of hope, behold her, not farr off,
Such as I saw her in my dream, adornd
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
To make her amiable:° On she came,

209

earthly nature
been exposed to
exceeds

withdrawn

mien, manner / breathed

lovable, lovely

460–1 Cell / Of Fancie. Cf. Adam’s explanation of the role of Fancy to Eve (5.100 –13).
465 left side. Some commentators explained that the left side is nearest the heart; others pointed to the left
as the “sinister” side, foreshadowing Eve’s role in the Fall.
466 cordial spirits. The so-called “vital spirits” that the heart distributes throughout the body.
478–520. Cf. Eve’s version of these events (4.467–91).

210
 
485 Led by her Heav’nly Maker, though unseen,

490

495

500

505

510

515

And guided by his voice, nor uninformd
Of nuptial Sanctitie and marriage Rites:
Grace was in all her steps, Heav’n in her Eye,
In every gesture dignitie and love.
I overjoyd could not forbear° aloud.
This turn hath made amends; thou hast fulfill’d
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benigne,
Giver of all things faire, but fairest this
Of all thy gifts, nor enviest.° I now see
Bone of my Bone, Flesh of my Flesh, my Self
Before me; Woman is her Name, of Man
Extracted; for this cause he shall forgoe
Father and Mother, and to his Wife adhere;
And they shall be one Flesh, one Heart, one Soule.
She heard me thus, and though divinely brought,
Yet Innocence and Virgin Modestie,
Her vertue and the conscience° of her worth,
That would be woo’d, and not unsought be won,
Not obvious,° not obtrusive,° but retir’d,
The more desirable, or to say all,
Nature her self, though pure of sinful thought,
Wrought in her so, that seeing me, she turn’d;
I follow’d her, she what was Honour knew,
And with obsequious° Majestie approv’d
My pleaded reason. To the Nuptial Bowre
I led her blushing like the Morn: all Heav’n,
And happie Constellations on that houre
Shed thir selectest influence; the Earth
Gave sign of gratulation,° and each Hill;
Joyous the Birds; fresh Gales° and gentle Aires°
Whisper’d it to the Woods, and from thir wings
Flung Rose, flung Odours from the spicie Shrub,
Disporting,° till the amorous Bird of Night°
Sung Spousal, and bid haste the Eevning Starr

keep from (speaking)

(do you) give reluctantly

consciousness
standing in the way / forward

compliant

rejoicing
winds / breezes, melodies

frolicking / nightingale

495–9. Cf. Gen. 2:23–4: “And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be
called Woman, because she was taken out of Man. Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother,
and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.”
511. Cf. Raphael’s “rosie red” glow at 8.618–19.
519–20 Eevning Starr. The rising of Hesperus was the signal among the ancients for lighting the “bridal
Lamp” and conducting the bride to the bridegroom.

Book 8

211

520 On his Hill top, to light the bridal Lamp.

525

530

535

540

545

550

555

Thus I have told thee all my State,° and brought
My Storie to the sum of earthly bliss
Which I enjoy, and must confess to find
In all things else delight indeed, but such
As us’d or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement desire, these delicacies
I mean of Taste, Sight, Smell, Herbs, Fruits and Flours,
Walks, and the melodie of Birds; but here
Farr otherwise, transported° I behold,
Transported touch; here passion first I felt,
Commotion strange, in all enjoyments else
Superiour and unmov’d, here onely weake
Against the charm of Beauties powerful glance.
Or° Nature faild in mee, and left some part
Not proof° enough such Object to sustain,°
Or from my side subducting,° took perhaps
More then enough; at least on her bestow’d
Too much of Ornament, in outward shew
Elaborate, of inward less exact.°
For well I understand in the prime end
Of Nature her th’ inferiour, in the mind
And inward Faculties, which most excell,
In outward also her resembling less
His Image who made both, and less expressing
The character of that Dominion giv’n
O’re other Creatures; yet when I approach
Her loveliness, so absolute° she seems
And in her self compleat, so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, vertuousest, discreetest,° best;
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded, Wisdom in discourse with her
Looses discount’nanc’t, and like folly shewes;
Authority and Reason on her waite,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally; and to consummate all,

condition

enraptured

either
strong / withstand
subtracting

perfect, finished

perfect, independent

most discerning

543–4 resembling less. Most commentators on Genesis agreed that Eve was a less perfect image of God
than was Adam.
553 Looses. Becomes unstable.
discount’nanc’t. Disconcerted.
556 Occasionally. Contingently, to meet Adam’s need.

212

560

565

570

575

580

585

590
 
Greatness of mind and nobleness thir seat
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
About her, as a guard Angelic plac’t.
To whom the Angel with contracted brow.
Accuse not Nature, she hath don her part;
Do thou but thine, and be not diffident°
Of Wisdom, she deserts thee not, if thou
Dismiss not her, when most thou needst her nigh,
By attributing overmuch to things
Less excellent, as thou thy self perceav’st.
For what admir’st thou, what transports thee so,
An outside? fair no doubt, and worthy well
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love,
Not thy subjection: weigh with her thy self;
Then value: Oft times nothing profits more
Then self esteem, grounded on just and right
Well manag’d; of that skill the more thou know’st,
The more she will acknowledge thee her Head,
And to realities yield all her shows:
Made so adorn for thy delight the more,
So awful,° that with honour thou maist love
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise.
But if the sense of touch whereby mankind
Is propagated seem such dear delight
Beyond all other, think the same voutsaf ’t
To Cattel and each Beast; which would not be
To them made common and divulg’d,° if aught
Therein enjoy’d were worthy to subdue
The Soule of Man, or passion in him move.
What higher in her societie thou findst
Attractive, human, rational, love still;
In loving thou dost well, in passion not,
Wherein true Love consists not; love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges,° hath his seat

mistrustful

awe-inspiring

imparted

makes more capacious

557 Greatness of mind. Intellectual excellence and also magnanimity.
574 Head. See 1 Cor. 11:3, “The head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and
the head of Christ is God.”
585 passion. Most commentators on Genesis agreed that Adam and Eve did not feel passion before the Fall.
Raphael seems to indicate that they should not (588–9) but he may not understand the human condition
fully, or he may mean simply that passions, which clearly Adam and Eve do feel in the state of innocence,
must not overthrow reason. See Areopagitica: “Wherefore did he creat passions within us, pleasures round
about us, but that these rightly temper’d are the very ingredients of vertu?”

Book 8

595

600

605

610

615

620

In Reason, and is judicious, is the scale
By which to heav’nly Love thou maist ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure, for which cause
Among the Beasts no Mate for thee was found.
To whom thus half abash’t Adam repli’d.
Neither her out-side formd so fair, nor aught
In procreation common to all kindes
(Though higher of the genial° Bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem)
So much delights me as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies° that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixt with Love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeign’d
Union of Mind, or in us both one Soule;
Harmonie to behold in wedded pair
More grateful then harmonious sound to the eare.
Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foild,°
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing; yet still free
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love thou blam’st me not, for love thou saist
Leads up to Heav’n, is both the way and guide;
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask;
Love not the heav’nly Spirits, and how thir Love
Express they, by looks onely, or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate° touch?
To whom the Angel with a smile that glow’d
Celestial rosie red, Loves proper hue,
Answer’d. Let it suffice thee that thou know’st
Us happie, and without Love no happiness.

213

marital, generative

fitting acts

overcome

actual

591–2 scale. Raphael summarizes the Neoplatonic ladder of love (see Plato, Symposium 211C –D), by which
humans may move from sensual love to higher stages of human love, and ultimately to love of the Good,
or God.
598–600. Adam takes respectful issue with Raphael’s apparent denigration of human sex in his account of
the Neoplatonic ladder.
mysterious. At Eph. 5:31–2 Paul speaks of the marital union (“one flesh”)
as a “great mystery,” as it reflects the union of Christ and the Church.
609–10. i.e., “various objects, variously represented to me by my senses.”
619. Red is the color traditionally associated with Seraphim, who burn with ardor. Raphael’s smile also glows
with friendship for Adam, and appreciation of his perceptive inference about angelic sex. Given the monism
Raphael explains in Book 5 (469–500) and demonstrates by eating human food, Raphael has to be made
to qualify his apparent Neoplatonic dualism in seeming so sharply to separate physical and spiritual love.

214

625

630

635

640

645

650
 
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoy’st
(And pure thou wert created) we enjoy
In eminence,° and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joynt, or limb, exclusive barrs:
Easier then Air with Air, if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, Union of Pure with Pure
Desiring; nor restrain’d conveyance° need
As Flesh to mix with Flesh, or Soul with Soul.
But I can now no more; the parting Sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles
Hesperean sets, my Signal to depart.
Be strong, live happie, and love, but first of all
Him whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command; take heed lest Passion sway
Thy Judgment to do aught, which else free Will
Would not admit; thine and of all thy Sons
The weal or woe in thee is plac’t; beware.
I in thy persevering shall rejoyce,
And all the Blest: stand fast; to stand or fall
Free in thine own Arbitrement° it lies.
Perfet within, no outward aid require;°
And all temptation to transgress repel.
So saying, he arose; whom Adam thus
Follow’d with benediction. Since° to part,
Go heavenly Guest, Ethereal° Messenger,
Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore.
Gentle to me and affable hath been
Thy condescension,° and shall be honour’d ever
With grateful Memorie: thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and oft return.
So parted they, the Angel up to Heav’n
From the thick shade, and Adam to his Bowre.

superlatively

restricting sexual organs

decision, choice
need

since we have
celestial

courtesy

The End of the Eighth Book.

631 Earths green Cape. Cape Verde near Dakar and the islands off that coast are the westernmost
(“Hesperian”) points of Africa.
634–5. Cf. 1 John 5:3: “this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments.”

Figure 7

Illustration to Book 9, 1688 ( John Baptista Medina)

BOOK 9
THE ARGUMENT
Satan having compast the Earth, with meditated guile returns as a mist by Night
into Paradise, enters into the Serpent sleeping. Adam and Eve in the Morning go forth
to thir labours, which Eve proposes to divide in several places, each labouring apart:
Adam consents not, alledging the danger, lest that Enemy, of whom they were fore5 warn’d, should attempt her found alone: Eve loath to be thought not circumspect or
firm enough, urges her going apart, the rather desirous to make tryal of her
strength; Adam at last yields: The Serpent finds her alone; his subtle approach, first
gazing, then speaking, with much flattery extolling Eve above all other Creatures.
Eve wondring to hear the Serpent speak, asks how he attain’d to human speech and
10 such understanding not till now; the Serpent answers, that by tasting of a certain
Tree in the Garden he attain’d both to Speech and Reason, till then void of both:
Eve requires him to bring her to that Tree, and finds it to be the Tree of Knowledge
forbidden: The Serpent now grown bolder, with many wiles and arguments induces
her at length to eat; she pleas’d with the taste deliberates a while whether to impart
15 thereof to Adam or not, at last brings him of the Fruit, relates what perswaded her
to eat thereof: Adam at first amaz’d, but perceiving her lost, resolves through vehemence of love to perish with her; and extenuating the trespass, eats also of the Fruit:
The Effects thereof in them both; they seek to cover thir nakedness; then fall to variance and accusation of one another.

No more of talk where God or Angel Guest
With Man, as with his Friend, familiar us’d
To sit indulgent,° and with him partake
Rural repast, permitting him the while
5 Venial° discourse unblam’d: I now must change
Those Notes to Tragic; foul distrust, and breach
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt,
And disobedience: On the part of Heav’n
Now alienated, distance and distaste,°
10 Anger and just rebuke, and judgement giv’n,
That brought into this World a world of woe,
Sinne and her shadow Death, and Miserie

gracious
excusable

aversion

16 amaz’d. Stunned.
1–47. In this fourth Proem, Milton does not invoke the Muse but testifies (21– 2) to her customary nightly
visits, “unimplor’d.”
1–6. The Miltonic Bard declares a shift in mode from the pastoral of “rural repast” and eclogue (which here
includes georgic labor, physical and intellectual) to “Tragic.”

Book 9

15

20

25

30

35

Deaths Harbinger: Sad task, yet argument°
Not less but more Heroic then the wrauth
Of stern Achilles on his Foe pursu’d
Thrice Fugitive about Troy Wall; or rage
Of Turnus for Lavinia disespous’d,
Or Neptun’s ire or Juno’s, that so long
Perplex’d° the Greek and Cytherea’s Son;
If answerable° style I can obtaine
Of my Celestial Patroness, who deignes
Her nightly visitation unimplor’d,
And dictates to me slumbring, or inspires
Easie my unpremeditated Verse:
Since first this Subject for Heroic Song
Pleas’d me long choosing, and beginning late;
Not sedulous° by Nature to indite°
Warrs, hitherto the onely Argument
Heroic deem’d, chief maistrie° to dissect
With long and tedious havoc° fabl’d Knights
In Battels feign’d; the better fortitude
Of Patience and Heroic Martyrdom
Unsung; or to describe Races and Games,
Or tilting Furniture, emblazon’d Shields,
Impreses quaint, Caparisons and Steeds;
Bases and tinsel Trappings, gorgious Knights
At Joust and Torneament; then marshal’d Feast

217
subject

tormented
suited to the subject

eager / write about
art, skill
fighting, destruction

13–19. The Bard proposes that the tragedy of the Fall surpasses the tragic element in several classical epics:
“Achilles” pursuing the fleeing (“Fugitive”) Hector (“his Foe”) three times around “Troy Wall” before killing
him; “Turnus” fighting and then killed by Aeneas, who had received as wife Turnus’ betrothed (“Lavinia
disespous’d”); Odysseus (“the Greek”) tormented by “Neptun’s ire” for blinding his son Polyphemus; and
Aeneas (“Cytherea’s [Venus’s] Son” plagued by “Juno’s” anger because Venus had been judged by Paris to
be more beautiful than Juno or Minerva.
21 Celestial Patroness. Urania, named in 7.1.
22–4 dictates to me slumbering. Milton’s verses seem to pour forth directly (“unpremeditated”) from the
Muse’s inspiration; they are the product of a lifetime of study, thought, and experience. Milton’s nephew,
Edward Phillips, reports that Milton often awoke in the morning with lines of poetry fully formed and
ready to be dictated to an amanuensis.
25–6. See Introduction, pp. xviii–xix, for an account of Milton’s “long” consideration of possible epic subjects and plans.
30–1 Battels feign’d. Milton disparages the customary subjects of epic and romance, with allusion to the
Arthurian matter he once considered as subject for a national epic, but then rejected as merely fables.
34–7. Milton now rejects several familar elements of contemporary romantic epics (Ariosto, Tasso, Spenser).
tilting Furniture. Equipment for jousting.
Impreses quaint. Ingenious heraldic devices on shields.
Caparisons. Ornamental coverings or armor for horses.
Bases. Cloth coverings for horses.
tinsel Trappings. Coverings over the harness or saddle of horses, ornamented with gold or silver threads.
37 marshal’d Feast. Well ordered, with guests arranged according to rank.

218

40

45

50

55

60

65
 
Serv’d up in Hall with Sewers,° and Seneshals;°
The skill of Artifice or Office mean,
Not that which justly gives Heroic name
To Person or to Poem. Mee of these
Nor skilld nor studious, higher Argument
Remaines, sufficient of it self to raise
That name, unless an age too late, or cold
Climat, or Years damp my intended wing
Deprest, and much they may, if all be mine,
Not Hers who brings it nightly to my Ear.
The Sun was sunk, and after him the Starr
Of Hesperus, whose Office is to bring
Twilight upon the Earth, short Arbiter°
Twixt Day and Night, and now from end to end
Nights Hemisphere had veild the Horizon round:
When Satan who late° fled before the threats
Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improv’d°
In meditated fraud and malice, bent
On mans destruction, maugre° what might hap
Of heavier° on himself, fearless return’d.
By Night he fled, and at Midnight return’d
From compassing the Earth, cautious of day,
Since Uriel Regent of the Sun descri’d°
His entrance, and forewarnd the Cherubim
That kept thir watch; thence full of anguish driv’n,
The space of seven continu’d Nights he rode
With darkness, thrice the Equinoctial Line
He circl’d, four times cross’d the Carr of Night
From Pole to Pole, traversing each Colure;
On the eighth return’d, and on the Coast averse°
From entrance or Cherubic Watch, by stealth
Found unsuspected way. There was a place,

waiters / stewards

mediator

recently
augmented
despite
heavier punishment

observed

the side opposite

44–6 That name. The designation, heroic poem.
age too late. The Restoration era might well be
unreceptive to this poem.
cold / Climat. Milton long believed that England’s climate was less amenable
to epic poetry than the warmth of the Mediterranean region.
Years. His own advanced age (he was
in his fifties when writing the poem).
damp. Benumb.
intended wing / Deprest. Purposed
poetic flights held down, kept from soaring.
49–50 Hesperus. The evening star, actually the planet Venus.
62–6. By circling the globe from east to west at the equator (“Equinoctial Line”) for three nights and then
longitudinally for four nights over the north and south poles (“From Pole to Pole”) Satan can remain in
darkness (“rode / With darkness”), keeping himself always in the earth’s shadow, ahead of the advancing
edge of the sun’s light.
Carr of Night. The earth’s shadow, imagined as a chariot driven by the
goddess, Night.
Colure. The colures were two great circles intersecting at right angles at the poles.

Book 9

219

70 Now not, though Sin, not Time, first wraught the change,

75

80

85

90

95

100

Where Tigris at the foot of Paradise
Into a Gulf shot under ground, till part
Rose up a Fountain by the Tree of Life;
In with the River sunk, and with it rose
Satan involv’d in rising Mist, then sought
Where to lie hid; Sea he had searcht and Land
From Eden over Pontus, and the Poole
Mæotis, up beyond the River Ob;
Downward as farr Antartic; and in length
West from Orontes to the Ocean barr’d
At Darien, thence to the Land where flowes
Ganges and Indus: thus the Orb he roam’d
With narrow search; and with inspection deep
Consider’d every Creature, which of all
Most opportune might serve his Wiles, and found
The Serpent suttlest Beast of all the Field.
Him after long debate, irresolute
Of° thoughts revolv’d, his final sentence° chose
Fit Vessel, fittest Imp° of fraud, in whom
To enter, and his dark suggestions hide
From sharpest sight: for in the wilie Snake,
Whatever sleights° none would suspicious mark,
As from his wit and native suttletie
Proceeding, which in other Beasts observ’d
Doubt° might beget of Diabolic pow’r
Active within beyond the sense of brute.
Thus he resolv’d, but first from inward griefe
His bursting passion into plaints thus pour’d:
O Earth, how like to Heav’n, if not preferr’d
More justly, Seat worthier of Gods, as built
With second thoughts, reforming what was old!
For what God after better worse would build?

among / decision
offspring, offshoot

artifices

suspicion

70 Now not. No longer existing.
71 Tigris. Cf. Gen. 2:10, one of the four rivers that flowed out of the garden (“Paradise”).
77–82. A reprise of Satan’s journey in geographical terms. In his north–south circles he passed the Black Sea
(“Pontus”), thence to the Sea of Azov in Russia (“Mœotis”), then beond the River Obi (“Ob”) in Siberia,
which flows into the Arctic Ocean, then south to Antarctica (“Antartic”). His westward circles bring him
from the Syrian river “Orontes” flowing into the Meditteranean Sea, then across the Atlantic which is
“barr’d” at the Isthmus of Panama (“Darien”), then across the Pacific and Asia to India, where the “Ganges”
and “Indus” rivers flow.
86. The serpent is so described in Gen. 3:1.

220

105

110

115

120

125

130

135

140
 
Terrestrial Heav’n, danc’t round by other Heav’ns
That shine, yet bear thir bright officious° Lamps,
Light above Light, for thee alone, as seems,
In thee concentring all thir precious beams
Of sacred influence: As God in Heav’n
Is Center, yet extends to all, so thou
Centring° receav’st from all those Orbs; in thee,
Not in themselves, all thir known vertue appeers
Productive in Herb, Plant, and nobler birth
Of Creatures animate with gradual° life
Of Growth, Sense, Reason, all summ’d up in Man.
With what delight could I have walkt thee round,
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange
Of Hill, and Vallie, Rivers, Woods and Plaines,
Now Land, now Sea, and Shores with Forrest crownd,
Rocks, Dens, and Caves; but I in none of these
Find place or refuge; and the more I see
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
Of contraries; all good to me becomes
Bane,° and in Heav’n much worse would be my state.
But neither here seek I, no nor in Heav’n
To dwell, unless by maistring Heav’ns Supreame;
Nor hope to be my self less miserable
By what I seek, but others to make such
As I, though thereby worse to me redound:°
For onely in destroying I find ease
To my relentless thoughts; and him destroyd,
Or won to what may work his utter loss,
For whom all this was made, all this will soon
Follow, as to him linkt in weal° or woe,
In wo then: that destruction wide may range:
To mee shall be the glorie sole among
The infernal Powers, in one day to have marr’d
What he Almightie styl’d, six Nights and Days
Continu’d making, and who knows how long
Before had bin contriving, though perhaps
Not longer then since I in one Night freed

dutiful

remaining in the center

in graded steps

poison

recoil upon me

happiness

105–7. Cf. the different views of the cosmos held by Eve (4.657 – 8), Adam (8.15 – 38), and Raphael (8.98 – 9,
114–78).

Book 9

145

150

155

160

165

170

175

From servitude inglorious welnigh half
Th’ Angelic Name, and thinner left the throng
Of his adorers: hee to be aveng’d,
And to repaire his numbers thus impair’d,
Whether such vertue° spent of old now faild
More Angels to Create, if they at least
Are his Created, or to spite us more,
Determin’d to advance into our room
A Creature form’d of Earth, and him endow,
Exalted from so base original,°
With Heav’nly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed
He effected; Man he made, and for him built
Magnificent this World, and Earth his seat,
Him Lord pronounc’d, and, O indignitie!
Subjected to his service Angel wings,
And flaming Ministers to watch and tend
Thir earthy Charge: Of these the vigilance
I dread, and to elude, thus wrapt in mist
Of midnight vapor glide obscure, and prie
In every Bush and Brake, where hap° may finde
The Serpent sleeping, in whose mazie foulds
To hide me, and the dark intent I bring.
O foul descent! that I who erst contended
With Gods to sit the highest, am now constraind
Into a Beast, and mixt with bestial slime,
This essence to incarnate and imbrute,
That to the hight of Deitie aspir’d;
But what will not Ambition and Revenge
Descend to? who aspires must down as low
As high he soard, obnoxious° first or last
To basest things. Revenge, at first though sweet,
Bitter ere long back on it self recoiles;
Let it; I reck° not, so it light well aim’d,
Since higher I fall short, on him who next
Provokes my envie, this new Favorite
Of Heav’n, this Man of Clay, Son of despite,

221

power

origin

luck

exposed

care

141–2. Cf. the conflicting estimates of the rebel numbers at 1.632 – 3, 2.692, and 6.156. Cf. Rev. 12:3 – 4, the
casting down of “the third part of the stars of heaven.”
146–7 his Created. Cf. 5.853–63 and 4.43.
151 spoils. Goods seized from a defeated enemy.
156 flaming Ministers. Cf. Heb. 1:7: “Who maketh his angels spirits and his ministers a flame of fire.”
166 imbrute. Satan embodying his “essence” in a snake parodies the Son becoming “incarnate” as man.

222

180

185

190

195

200

205

210

215
 
Whom us the more to spite his Maker rais’d
From dust: spite then with spite is best repaid.
So saying, through each Thicket Danck or Drie,
Like a black mist low creeping, he held on
His midnight search, where soonest he might finde
The Serpent: him fast sleeping soon he found
In Labyrinth of many a round self-rowld,°
His head the midst, well stor’d with suttle wiles:
Not yet in horrid Shade° or dismal Den,
Nor nocent° yet, but on the grassie Herbe
Fearless unfeard he slept: in at his Mouth
The Devil enterd, and his brutal° sense,
In heart or head, possessing soon inspir’d
With act intelligential; but his sleep
Disturbd not, waiting close° th’ approach of Morn.
Now when as sacred Light began to dawne
In Eden on the humid Flours, that breathd
Thir morning incense, when all things that breath,
From th’ Earths great Altar send up silent praise
To the Creator, and his Nostrils fill
With grateful° Smell, forth came the human pair
And joind thir vocal Worship to the Quire
Of Creatures wanting° voice, that done, partake
The season, prime° for sweetest Sents and Aires:°
Then commune how that day they best may ply
Thir growing work: for much thir work outgrew
The hands dispatch of two Gardning so wide.
And Eve first to her Husband thus began.
Adam, well may we labour still° to dress
This Garden, still to tend Plant, Herb and Flour,
Our pleasant task enjoyn’d,° but till more hands
Aid us, the work under our labour grows,
Luxurious° by restraint; what we by day
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind,
One night or two with wanton° growth derides
Tending to wilde. Thou therefore now advise
Or hear what to my minde first thoughts present,
Let us divide our labours, thou where choice
Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind
The Woodbine° round this Arbour, or direct

183 Labyrinth. Home of the monstrous Minotaur.
190 act intelligential. Power of intelligent action.

coiled
bristling shrubs
harmful, guilty
animal

concealed

pleasing, thankful
lacking
best / breezes, songs

continually
commanded
luxuriant
profuse, unruly

honeysuckle

Book 9

220

225

230

235

240

245

250

The clasping Ivie where to climb, while I
In yonder Spring° of Roses intermixt
With Myrtle, find what to redress° till Noon:
For while so near each other thus all day
Our taske we choose, what wonder if so near
Looks intervene and smiles, or object new
Casual discourse draw on, which intermits°
Our dayes work brought to little, though begun
Early, and th’ hour of Supper comes unearn’d.
To whom mild answer Adam thus return’d.
Sole° Eve, Associate sole,° to me beyond
Compare above all living Creatures deare,
Well hast thou motion’d,° well thy thoughts imployd
How we might best fulfill the work which here
God hath assign’d us, nor of me shalt pass
Unprais’d: for nothing lovelier can be found
In Woman, then to studie houshold good,
And good workes in her Husband to promote.
Yet not so strictly hath our Lord impos’d
Labour, as to debarr us when we need
Refreshment, whether food, or talk between,°
Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse
Of looks and smiles, for smiles from Reason flow,
To brute deni’d, and are of Love the food,
Love not the lowest end of human life.
For not to irksom toile, but to delight
He made us, and delight to Reason joyn’d.
These paths & Bowers doubt not but our joynt hands
Will keep from Wilderness with ease, as wide
As we need walk, till younger hands ere long
Assist us: But if much converse perhaps
Thee satiate, to short absence I could yield.
For solitude somtimes is best societie,
And short retirement urges sweet returne.
But other doubt possesses me, least harm
Befall thee sever’d from me; for thou knowst
What hath bin warn’d us, what malicious Foe
Envying our happiness, and of his own

223

growth, thicket
set upright

interrupts

unrivalled / only
proposed

at intervals of work

231–4. Adam’s praises invite comparison with the qualities of a virtuous wife set forth in Prov. 31, especially
verses 27–8: “She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness. Her
children arise up and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth her.”

224
 
255 Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame

260

265

270

275

280

285

290

By sly assault; and somwhere nigh at hand
Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find
His wish and best advantage, us asunder,
Hopeless to circumvent us joynd, where each
To other speedie aide might lend at need;
Whether his first design be to withdraw
Our fealtie° from God, or to disturb
Conjugal Love, then which perhaps no bliss
Enjoy’d by us excites his envie more;
Or° this, or worse, leave not the faithful side
That gave thee being, still shades thee and protects.
The Wife, where danger or dishonour lurks,
Safest and seemliest by her Husband staies,
Who guards her, or with her the worst endures.
To whom the Virgin Majestie of Eve,
As one who loves, and some unkindness meets,
With sweet austeer composure thus reply’d.
Ofspring of Heav’n and Earth, and all Earths Lord,
That such an Enemie we have, who seeks
Our ruin, both by thee informd I learne,
And from the parting Angel over-heard
As in a shadie nook I stood behind,
Just then returnd at shut of Evening Flours.
But that thou shouldst my firmness therfore doubt
To God or thee, because we have a foe
May tempt it, I expected not to hear.
His violence thou fear’st not, being such,
As wee, not capable of death or paine,
Can either not receave, or can repell.
His fraud is then thy fear, which plain inferrs°
Thy equal fear that my firm Faith and Love
Can by his fraud be shak’n or seduc’t;
Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy brest
Adam, misthought° of her to thee so dear?
To whom with healing words Adam replyd.

loyalty, feudal duty

whether

clearly suggests

misjudged

270 Virgin. Unspotted, peerless. Virginity in Puritan usage can include chaste marriage. See Calvin, Institutes
4.12:28: “the second sort of virginity is the chaste love of matrimony.” Cf. PL 4.737–73.
275–8 over-heard. Eve had been “attentive” to all of Raphael’s story about Satan (7:51), but evidently hears
his reiterated warnings from a “shadie nook” when she returns from tending her flowers just as he departs
(8:41–51, 633–643).

Book 9

295

300

305

310

315

320

325

Daughter of God and Man, immortal Eve,
For such thou art, from sin and blame entire:°
Not diffident° of thee do I dissuade
Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid
Th’ attempt it self, intended by our Foe.
For hee who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses°
The tempted with dishonour foul, suppos’d
Not incorruptible of Faith, not prooff
Against temptation: thou thy self with scorne
And anger wouldst resent the offer’d wrong,
Though ineffectual found: misdeem° not then,
If such affront I labour to avert
From thee alone, which on us both at once
The Enemie, though bold, will hardly dare,
Or daring, first on mee th’ assault shall light.
Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn;°
Suttle he needs must be, who could seduce
Angels nor think superfluous others aid.
I from the influence of thy looks receave
Access° in every Vertue, in thy sight
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were
Of outward strength; while shame, thou looking on,
Shame to be overcome or over-reacht°
Would utmost vigor raise, and rais’d unite.
Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee feel
When I am present, and thy trial choose
With me, best witness of thy Vertue tri’d.
So spake domestick Adam in his care
And Matrimonial Love; but Eve, who thought
Less° attributed to her Faith sincere,
Thus her reply with accent sweet renewd.
If this be our condition, thus to dwell
In narrow circuit strait’nd° by a Foe,
Suttle or violent, we not endu’d
Single with like° defence, wherever met,
How are we happie, still° in fear of harm?

225

unblemished
distrustful

bespatters

do not misinterpret

disdain

increase

outwitted

too little

confined
equal
always

309–12. In Renaissance Neoplatonism, love (and especially the sight of the beloved) inspired the lover to
virtue.
322–41. Compare and contrast Areopagitica: “I cannot praise a fugitive and cloister’d vertue, unexercis’d &
unbreath’d, that never sallies out and sees her adversary, but slinks out of the race, where that immortall
garland is to be run for, not without dust and heat. Assuredly we bring not innocence into the world, we
bring impurity much rather: that which purifies us is triall, and triall is by what is contrary.”

226

330

335

340

345

350

355

360
 
But harm precedes not sin: onely our Foe
Tempting affronts° us with his foul esteem
Of our integritie: his foul esteeme
Sticks no dishonor on our Front,° but turns
Foul on himself; then wherefore shund or feard
By us? who rather double honour gaine
From his surmise prov’d false, find peace within,
Favour from Heav’n, our witness from th’ event.°
And what is Faith, Love, Vertue unassaid
Alone, without exterior help sustaind?
Let us not then suspect our happie State
Left so imperfet by the Maker wise,
As not secure to single° or combin’d.
Fraile is our happiness, if this be so,
And Eden were no Eden thus expos’d.
To whom thus Adam fervently° repli’d.
O Woman, best are all things as the will
Of God ordain’d them, his creating hand
Nothing imperfet or deficient left
Of all that he Created, much less Man,
Or aught that might his happie State secure,
Secure from outward force; within himself
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
Against his will he can receave no harme.
But God left free the Will, for what obeyes
Reason, is free, and Reason he made right,
But bid her well beware, and still erect,°
Least by some faire appeering good surpris’d
She dictate false, and misinforme the Will
To do what God expresly hath forbid,
Not then mistrust, but tender love enjoynes,°
That I should mind° thee oft, and mind thou me.
Firm we subsist,° yet possible to swerve,
Since Reason not impossibly may meet
Some specious° object by the Foe subornd,°
And fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warnd.
Seek not temptation then, which to avoide

insults
forehead, face

outcome

one alone

passionately

always alert

dictates
remind, pay heed to
stand, exist
deceptively attractive / corrupted

349–56 Reason he made right. Right Reason, a classical concept accommodated to Christian (Scholastic)
philosophy, is the God-given power to apprehend truth and the moral law. See Christian Doctrine 1.4: “Reason
has been implanted in all, by which they may of themselves resist bad desires.” Also, cf. PL 5.520 – 9.

Book 9

227

365 Were better, and most likelie if from mee

370

375

380

385

390

395

Thou sever not: Trial will come unsought.
Wouldst thou approve° thy constancie, approve°
First thy obedience; th’ other who can know,
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
But if thou think, trial unsought may finde
Us both securer° then thus warnd thou seemst,
Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more;
Go in thy native innocence, relie
On what thou hast of vertue, summon all,
For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine.
So spake the Patriarch of Mankinde, but Eve
Persisted, yet submiss,° though last, repli’d.
With thy permission then, and thus forewarnd
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words
Touchd onely, that our trial, when least sought,
May finde us both perhaps farr less prepar’d,
The willinger I goe, nor much expect
A Foe so proud will first the weaker seek;
So bent,° the more shall shame him his repulse.
Thus saying, from her Husbands hand her hand
Soft she withdrew, and like a Wood-Nymph light
Oread or Dryad, or of Delia’s Traine,
Betook her to the Groves, but Delia’s self
In gate° surpass’d and Goddess-like deport,°
Though not as shee with Bow and Quiver armd,
But with such Gardning Tools as Art yet rude,
Guiltless of fire had formd, or Angels brought.
To Pales, or Pomona thus adornd,
Likest she seemd, Pomona when she fled
Vertumnus, or to Ceres in her Prime,
Yet Virgin of Proserpina from Jove.
Her long with ardent look his Eye pursu’d

give proof of

more careless

still submissive

if he does so

movement / bearing

386–90 light. Light-footed, quick, but with overtones of fickle or frivolous.
Oread. A mountain-nymph.
Dryad. A wood-nymph.
Delia. Diana, born on the isle of Delos, hunted with a “Traine” of nymphs,
and with “Bow and Quiver.”
392 Guiltless of fire. Without experience of fire, unneeded in Paradise. So Eve’s gardening tools are necessarily “rude.” A possible allusion also to the guilt of Prometheus, who stole fire from heaven.
393–6 Pales. Goddess of flocks and pastures.
Pomona. Goddess of fruit-trees; she was chased by the
wood-god “Vertumnus” in many guises, before surrendering to him.
Ceres. Goddess of harvests, in
the springtime (“Prime”) of life before she was impregnated by “Jove” with “Proserpina,” whose abduction
by Pluto to Hades brought winter to the world.

228

400

405

410

415

420

425

430

435
 
Delighted, but desiring more her stay.
Oft he to her his charge of quick returne
Repeated, shee to him as oft engag’d
To be returnd by Noon amid the Bowre,
And all things in best order to invite
Noontide repast, or Afternoons repose.
O much deceav’d, much failing,° hapless° Eve,
Of thy presum’d return! event perverse!
Thou never from that houre in Paradise
Foundst either sweet repast, or sound repose;
Such ambush hid among sweet Flours and Shades
Waited with hellish rancour imminent°
To intercept thy way, or send thee back
Despoild of Innocence, of Faith, of Bliss.
For now, and since first break of dawne the Fiend,
Meer Serpent in appearance, forth was come,
And on his Quest, where likeliest he might finde
The onely two of Mankinde, but in them
The whole included Race, his purposd prey.
In Bowre and Field he sought, where any tuft
Of Grove or Garden-Plot more pleasant lay,
Thir tendance° or Plantation for delight,
By Fountain or by shadie Rivulet
He sought them both, but wish’d his hap° might find
Eve separate, he wish’d, but not with hope
Of what so seldom chanc’d, when to his wish,
Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies,
Veild in a Cloud of Fragrance, where she stood,
Half spi’d, so thick the Roses bushing round
About her glowd, oft stooping to support
Each Flour of slender stalk, whose head though gay
Carnation, Purple, Azure, or spect with Gold,
Hung drooping unsustaind, them she upstaies
Gently with Mirtle band, mindless° the while,
Her self, though fairest unsupported Flour,
From her best prop so farr, and storm so nigh.
Neerer he drew, and many a walk travers’d
Of stateliest Covert,° Cedar, Pine, or Palme,

erring / unlucky

looming

object of care
luck

heedless

shelter

404–11. The author’s direct address to a character is a Homeric formula.
431–3. Echoing 4:268–72, the conceit of Eve as Proserpine, the flower-gatherer who was herself gathered by
“gloomie Dis.”

Book 9

440

445

450

455

460

465

Then voluble° and bold, now hid, now seen
Among thick-wov’n Arborets° and Flours
Imborderd on each Bank, the hand° of Eve:
Spot more delicious then those Gardens feign’d
Or° of reviv’d Adonis, or renownd
Alcinous, host of old Laertes Son,
Or that, not Mystic, where the Sapient King
Held dalliance with his fair Egyptian Spouse.
Much hee the Place admir’d, the Person more.
As one who long in populous City pent,
Where Houses thick and Sewers annoy° the Aire,
Forth issuing on a Summers Morn to breathe
Among the pleasant Villages and Farmes
Adjoynd, from each thing met conceaves delight,
The smell of Grain, or tedded° Grass, or Kine,°
Or Dairie, each rural sight, each rural sound;
If chance with Nymphlike step fair Virgin pass,
What pleasing seemd, for° her now pleases more,
She most, and in her look summs all Delight.
Such Pleasure took the Serpent to behold
This Flourie Plat,° the sweet recess° of Eve
Thus earlie, thus alone; her Heav’nly forme
Angelic, but more soft, and Feminine,
Her graceful Innocence, her every Aire°
Of gesture or lest action overawd
His Malice, and with rapine sweet bereav’d
His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought:
That space the Evil one abstracted° stood
From his own evil, and for the time remaind
Stupidly good,° of enmitie disarm’d,
Of guile, of hate, of envie, of revenge;
But the hot Hell that alwayes in him burnes,
Though in mid Heav’n, soon ended his delight,
And tortures him now more, the more he sees

229
gliding, undulating
small trees
handiwork
either

make noisome, pollute

spread out to dry / cattle

because of

plot / retreat

manner

withdrawn
good because in a stupor

440–1 reviv’d Adonis. The Garden of Adonis was a beautiful pleasure garden named for the lovely youth
loved by Venus, killed by a boar, and, in some versions of the myth, revived and enjoyed by Venus in
that garden (cf. Faerie Queene 3.6.29–46).
Alcinous. The Phæacian king who entertained “Laertes Son”
Odysseus in magnificent gardens (Odyssey 7.112–35).
442–3 Sapient King. Solomon, noted for his wisdom (sapience) entertained his “fair Egyptian Spouse,” the
queen of Sheba, in a lovely garden (S. of S. 6:2) that was real, not mythic (“Mystic”) as the others were.
461 rapine sweet. From Latin rapere, to seize, the root of both “rape” and “rapture,” underscoring the paradox of the ravisher (temporarily) ravished.
bereav’d. Took from.

230
 
470 Of pleasure not for him ordain’d: then soon

475

480

485

490

495

500

505

Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts
Of mischief, gratulating,° thus excites.
Thoughts, whither have ye led me, with what sweet
Compulsion thus transported° to forget
What hither brought us, hate, not love, nor hope
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste
Of pleasure, but all pleasure to destroy,
Save what is in destroying, other joy
To me is lost. Then let me not let pass
Occasion which now smiles, behold alone
The Woman, opportune° to all attempts,
Her Husband, for I view far round, not nigh,
Whose higher intellectual more I shun,
And strength, of courage hautie,° and of limb
Heroic built, though of terrestrial mould,°
Foe not informidable, exempt from wound,
I not; so much hath Hell debas’d, and paine
Infeebl’d me, to° what I was in Heav’n.
Shee fair, divinely fair, fit Love for Gods,
Not terrible,° though terrour° be in Love
And beautie, not° approacht by stronger hate,
Hate stronger, under shew of Love well feign’d,
The way which to her ruin now I tend.
So spake the Enemie of Mankind, enclos’d
In Serpent, Inmate bad, and toward Eve
Address’d his way, not with indented° wave,
Prone on the ground, as since, but on his reare,
Circular base of rising foulds, that tour’d°
Fould above fould a surging Maze, his Head
Crested aloft, and Carbuncle° his Eyes;
With burnisht Neck of verdant Gold, erect
Amidst his circling Spires,° that on the grass
Floted redundant:° pleasing was his shape,
And lovely, never since of Serpent kind
Lovelier, not those that in Illyria chang’d
Hermione and Cadmus, or the God

welcoming
entranced

open, exposed

exalted
earthly substance

in comparison with
terrifying / awe
unless

undulating, zigzagging
towered
deep red
coils
in swelling waves

505–7 Cadmus. The legendary founder of Thebes, and his wife Harmonia (“Hermione”) were changed to
serpents when they went to “Illyria” (Albania) in old age.
the God. Aesculapius, god of healing,
sometimes came forth as a serpent from his temple in “Epidaurus” – erect, crested, and with gilded folds
like Satan’s serpent (Ovid, Metamorphoses 15.622–744).

Book 9

510

515

520

525

530

535

In Epidaurus; nor to which transformd
Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline was seen,
Hee with Olympias, this with her who bore
Scipio the highth of Rome. With tract° oblique
At first, as one who sought access, but feard
To interrupt, side-long he works his way.
As when a Ship by skilful Stearsman wrought°
Nigh Rivers mouth or Foreland, where the Wind
Veres oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her Saile;
So varied hee, and of his tortuous Traine°
Curld many a wanton° wreath in sight of Eve,
To lure her Eye; shee busied heard the sound
Of rusling Leaves, but minded not, as us’d
To such disport before her through the Field,
From every Beast, more duteous at her call,
Then at Circean call the Herd disguis’d.
Hee boulder now, uncall’d before her stood;
But as in gaze admiring: Oft he bowd
His turret Crest, and sleek enamel’d° Neck,
Fawning, and lick’d the ground whereon she trod.
His gentle dumb expression turnd at length
The Eye of Eve to mark his play; he glad
Of her attention gaind, with Serpent Tongue
Organic, or impulse of vocal Air,
His fraudulent temptation thus began.
Wonder not, sovran Mistress, if perhaps
Thou canst, who art sole Wonder, much less arm
Thy looks, the Heav’n of mildness, with disdain,
Displeas’d that I approach thee thus, and gaze
Insatiate, I thus single, nor have feard
Thy awful° brow, more awful thus retir’d.
Fairest resemblance of thy Maker faire,

231

course

worked (sailed)

twisting tail
luxuriant, sportive

multicolored, jewel-like

inspiring awe

507–10 Ammonian Jove. Jupiter Ammon made love to “Olympias” in the form of a serpent, and sired
Alexander the Great.
Capitoline. Jupiter Capitolinus in serpent form sired “Scipio” Africanus, the
“highth of Rome” (greatest Roman), who defeated Hannibal.
521–2 Circean call. The witch Circe transformed men into a “Herd disguis’d” of fawning animals (Odyssey
10:212–19; Metamorphoses 14.45f ).
529–30 Organic. Satan either used the actual tongue (organ) of the serpent or else produced vibrations (“impulse”)
in the air to produce speech.
532–48. Satan’s entire speech is couched in the extravagant phrases and conceits of the Petrarchan love tradition; cf. Eve’s dream at 5.38–93.

232

540

545

550

555

560

565

570

575

580
 
Thee all things living gaze on, all things thine
By gift, and thy Celestial Beautie adore
With ravishment beheld, there best beheld
Where universally admir’d; but here
In this enclosure wild, these Beasts among,
Beholders rude, and shallow° to discerne
Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
Who sees thee? (and what is one?) who shouldst be seen
A Goddess among Gods, ador’d and serv’d
By Angels numberless, thy daily Train.°
So gloz’d° the Tempter, and his Proem° tun’d;
Into the Heart of Eve his words made way,
Though at the voice much marveling; at length
Not unamaz’d she thus in answer spake.
What may this mean? Language of Man pronounc’t
By Tongue of Brute, and human sense exprest?
The first at lest of these I thought deni’d
To Beasts, whom God on thir Creation-Day
Created mute to all articulat sound;
The latter I demurre,° for in thir looks
Much reason, and in thir actions oft appeers.
Thee, Serpent, suttlest beast of all the field
I knew, but not with human voice endu’d;°
Redouble then this miracle, and say,
How cam’st thou speakable° of mute, and how
To me so friendly grown above the rest
Of brutal kind,° that daily are in sight?
Say, for such wonder claims attention due.
To whom the guileful Tempter thus reply’d.
Empress of this fair World, resplendent Eve,
Easie to mee it is to tell thee all
What thou commandst and right thou shouldst be obeyd:
I was at first as other Beasts that graze
The trodden Herb, of abject thoughts and low,
As was my food, nor aught but food discern’d
Or Sex, and apprehended nothing high:
Till on a day roaving the field, I chanc’d
A goodly Tree farr distant to behold
Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixt,
Ruddie and Gold: I nearer drew to gaze;
When from the boughes a savorie° odour blow’n,
Grateful° to appetite, more pleas’d my sense

superficial

retinue
flattered / preface

hesitate to affirm

endowed
capable of speech
the animals

appetizing
pleasing

Book 9

585

590

595

600

605

610

Then smell of sweetest Fenel, or the Teats
Of Ewe or Goat dropping with Milk at Eevn,
Unsuckt of Lamb or Kid, that tend thir play.
To satisfie the sharp desire I had
Of tasting those fair Apples, I resolv’d
Not to deferr; hunger and thirst at once,
Powerful perswaders, quick’nd at the scent
Of that alluring fruit, urg’d me so keene.
About the mossie Trunk I wound me soon,
For high from ground the branches would require
Thy utmost reach or Adams: Round the Tree
All other Beasts that saw, with like desire
Longing and envying stood, but could not reach.
Amid the Tree now got, where plenty hung
Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill
I spar’d° not, for such pleasure till that hour
At Feed or Fountain never had I found.
Sated at length, ere long I might perceave
Strange alteration in me, to degree
Of Reason in my inward Powers, and Speech
Wanted° not long, though to this shape retain’d.
Thenceforth to Speculations high or deep
I turnd my thoughts, and with capacious mind
Considerd all things visible in Heav’n,
Or Earth, or Middle,° all things fair and good;
But all that fair and good in thy Divine
Semblance, and in thy Beauties heav’nly Ray
United I beheld; no Fair° to thine
Equivalent or second, which compel’d
Mee thus, though importune° perhaps, to come
And gaze, and worship thee of right declar’d
Sovran of Creatures, universal Dame.°
So talk’d the spirited sly Snake; and Eve

233

refrained

lacked

regions between

beauty
unfit, untimely
mistress of the universe

581–2 sweetest Fenel. According to Pliny serpents ate fennel to aid in shedding their skins and to sharpen
their eyesight; folklore had it that they drank the milk of sheep and goats.
585 fair Apples. Genesis does not identify the forbidden fruit as apples, but that identification became conventional, probably because in Latin malum means both apple and evil (malus).
599–604 to degree. To bring on by degrees “Of Reason.” There is no precedent in Genesis or the interpretative tradition for Satan’s argument by analogy based on the snake’s supposed experience of attaining to
reason and speech by eating the forbidden fruit.
606–12. Satan continues his Petrarchan language of courtship.
613 spirited. Both inspired by and possessed by an evil spirit, Satan.

234

615

620

625

630

635

640

645

650
 
Yet more amaz’d unwarie thus reply’d.
Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt
The vertue° of that Fruit, in thee first prov’d:°
But say, where grows the Tree, from hence how far?
For many are the Trees of God that grow
In Paradise, and various, yet° unknown
To us, in such aboundance lies our choice,
As leaves a greater store of Fruit untoucht,
Still hanging incorruptible, till men
Grow up to thir provision,° and more hands
Help to disburden Nature of her Bearth.°
To whom the wilie Adder, blithe and glad.
Empress, the way is readie,° and not long,
Beyond a row of Myrtles, on a Flat,
Fast by a Fountain, one small Thicket past
Of blowing Myrrh and Balme; if thou accept
My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon.
Lead then, said Eve. Hee leading swiftly rowld
In tangles, and made intricate seem strait,
To mischief swift. Hope elevates, and joy
Bright’ns his Crest, as when a wandring Fire
Compact of unctuous vapor, which the Night
Condenses, and the cold invirons round,°
Kindl’d through agitation to a Flame,
Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends
Hovering and blazing with delusive Light,
Misleads th’ amaz’d Night-wanderer from his way
To Boggs and Mires, and oft through Pond or Poole,
There swallow’d up and lost, from succour farr.
So glister’d° the dire Snake, and into fraud°
Led Eve our credulous Mother, to the Tree
Of prohibition, root of all our woe;
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake.
Serpent, we might have spar’d our coming hither,
Fruitless to mee, though Fruit be here to excess,
The credit of whose vertue° rest with thee,
Wondrous indeed, if cause of such effects.

power / tested

still

what is provided
birth, what she bears
nearby

envelops

glittered / deception

power

629 blowing. Blossoming trees that exude the aromatic gums, “Myrrh” and “Balme” (balsam).
634–42 wandring Fire. Will-o’-the-wisp, phosphorescent marsh gas, composed (“compact”) of an oily
(“unctuous”) exhalation kindled through friction (“agitation”) to a “Flame.” Often mistaken for “evil
Spirits,” such fires frightened and misled the bewildered (“amaz’d”) “Night-wanderer” into “Boggs and Mires.”

Book 9

655

660

665

670

675

But of this Tree we may not taste nor touch;
God so commanded, and left that Command
Sole Daughter of his voice; the rest, we live
Law to our selves, our Reason is our Law.
To whom the Tempter guilefully repli’d.
Indeed? hath God then said that of the Fruit
Of all these Garden Trees ye shall not eate,
Yet Lords declar’d of all in Earth or Aire?
To whom thus Eve yet° sinless. Of the Fruit
Of each Tree in the Garden we may eate,
But of the Fruit of this fair Tree amidst
The Garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eate
Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, least ye die.
She scarse had said, though brief, when now more bold
The Tempter, but with shew of Zeale and Love
To Man, and indignation at his wrong,
New part° puts on, and as to passion mov’d,
Fluctuats° disturbd, yet comely and in act
Rais’d, as of som great matter to begin.
As when of old som Orator renound
In Athens or free Rome, where Eloquence
Flourishd, since mute, to som great cause addrest,
Stood in himself collected, while each part,
Motion,° each act won audience ere the tongue,°
Somtimes in highth° began, as no delay
Of Preface brooking through his Zeal of Right.
So standing, moving, or to highth upgrown
The Tempter all impassiond thus began.

235

still

role
moves like a wave

gesture / before speaking
the high style

653–4 Daughter of his voice. A Hebraism, Bath Kol, daughter of a voice. This is God’s “Sole” direct commandment; otherwise their unfallen “Reason” leads them to understand and follow the moral “Law”
of nature.
659–63. Cf. Gen. 3:1–3: “Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the Lord God
had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden: But of the fruit
of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch
it, lest ye die.” Eve’s formulation indicates her “sufficient” understanding of the prohibition.
668–9 act / Rais’d. Drawn up to full dignity.
670–2 som Orator renound. Like the Athenian Demosthenes or the Roman Cicero, defending liberty “som
great cause.”
free Rome. Rome when it was a republic.
since mute. Such oratory no longer
exists, presumably because such love of liberty (in monarchical Europe, and now including England) no
longer exists.
675–8 brooking. Allowing; Satan omits the usual rhetorical practice of beginning with a “Preface” and
rising by stages to “highth” of style, but rather begins his speech at once in an “impassion’d” high style
(“to highth upgrown”).

236

680

685

690

695

700

705

710
 
O Sacred, Wise, and Wisdom-giving Plant,
Mother of Science,° Now I feel thy Power
Within me cleere, not onely to discerne
Things in thir Causes, but to trace the wayes
Of highest Agents, deemd however wise.
Queen of this Universe, doe not believe
Those rigid threats of Death; ye shall not Die:
How should ye? by the Fruit? it gives you Life
To° Knowledge. By the Threatner? look on mee,
Mee who have touch’d and tasted, yet both live,
And life more perfet have attaind then Fate
Meant mee, by ventring higher then my Lot.
Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast
Is open? or will God incense° his ire
For such a petty Trespass, and not praise
Rather your dauntless vertue,° whom the pain°
Of Death denounc’t,° whatever thing Death be,
Deterrd not from atchieving what might leade
To happier life, knowledge of Good and Evil;
Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil
Be real, why not known, since easier shunnd?
God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just;
Not just, not God; not feard then, nor obeyd:
Your feare it self of Death removes the feare.
Why then was this forbid? Why but to awe,
Why but to keep ye low and ignorant,
His worshippers; he knows that in the day
Ye Eate thereof, your Eyes that seem so cleere,
Yet are but dim, shall perfetly be then
Op’nd and cleerd, and ye shall be as Gods,
Knowing both Good and Evil as they know.
That ye should be as Gods, since I as Man,
Internal Man, is but proportion meet,

knowledge

leading to

kindle
courage / punishment
threatened

685 ye shall not Die. Cf. Gen. 3:4, “And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die.”
689 Fate. As often before, Satan ascribes ultimate agency to Fate rather than God.
695 whatever thing Death be. Satan has of course met Death (2.781–814; cf. 4.425– 7).
698–9 if what is evil / Be real. Theologians normally defined evil as a privation of or turning away from
good; on that assumption Satan argues that evil has no real existence.
708 Gods. Satan often equivocates with the term suggesting the angels’ equality with God; throughout this
passage he explicitly describes them as a pantheon of gods (cf. 718–19).
711 proportion meet. Satan invites Adam and Eve to aspire to divinity based on analogy with the supposed
experience of the snake.

Book 9

715

720

725

730

735

740

I of brute human, yee of human Gods.
So ye shall die perhaps, by putting off
Human, to put on Gods, death to be wisht,
Though threat’nd, which no worse then this can bring.
And what are Gods that Man may not become
As they, participating° God-like food?
The Gods are first, and that advantage use
On our belief, that all from them proceeds;
I question it, for this fair Earth I see,
Warm’d by the Sun, producing every kind,
Them nothing: If they all° things, who enclos’d
Knowledge of Good and Evil in this Tree,
That whoso eats thereof, forthwith attains
Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies
Th’ offence, that Man should thus attain to know?
What can your knowledge hurt him, or this Tree
Impart against his will if all be his?
Or is it envie, and can envie dwell
In Heav’nly brests? these, these and many more
Causes import° your need of this fair Fruit.
Goddess humane,° reach then, and freely taste.
He ended, and his words replete with guile
Into her heart too easie entrance won:
Fixt on the Fruit she gaz’d, which to behold
Might tempt alone, and in her ears the sound
Yet rung of his perswasive words, impregn’d°
With Reason, to her seeming, and with Truth;
Mean while the hour of Noon drew on, and wak’d
An eager appetite, rais’d by the smell
So savorie° of that Fruit, which with desire,
Inclinable° now grown to touch or taste,
Sollicited her longing eye; yet first
Pausing a while, thus to her self she mus’d.

237

sharing, partaking of

produce all

prove
human, gracious

impregnated, filled

appetizing
disposed

713–15. Satan perverts the Pauline concept of death to sin (Col. 3:3, 9 –10): “For ye are dead, and your life
is hid with Christ in God . . . ye have put off the old man with his deeds; And have put on the new man,
which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him.”
716–17. Compare and contrast Raphael’s prediction of human evolution (5.491–500).
729–30. An echo of Virgil’s comment on Juno’s anger (Aeneid 1.11), “Can so much anger dwell in heavenly
hearts.”
735–40 eager appetite. Cf. Gen. 3:6: “the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise.”
744 Pausing a while. The pause makes Eve’s action a matter of willed choice, not merely impulsive.

238
745

750

755

760

765

770

775

780
 
Great are thy Vertues,° doubtless, best of Fruits,
Though kept from Man, and worthy to be admir’d,
Whose taste, too long forborn, at first assay°
Gave elocution° to the mute, and taught
The Tongue not made for Speech to speak thy praise:
Thy praise hee also who forbids thy use,
Conceales not from us, naming thee the Tree
Of Knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil;
Forbids us then to taste, but his forbidding
Commends thee more, while it inferrs° the good
By thee communicated, and our want:°
For good unknown, sure is not had, or had
And yet unknown, is as not had at all.
In plain° then, what forbids he but to know,
Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise?
Such prohibitions binde not. But if Death
Bind us with after-bands,° what profits then
Our inward freedom? In the day we eate
Of this fair Fruit, our doom is, we shall die.
How dies the Serpent? hee hath eat’n and lives,
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discerns,
Irrational till then. For us alone
Was death invented? or to us deni’d
This intellectual food, for beasts reserv’d?
For Beasts it seems: yet that one Beast which first
Hath tasted, envies° not, but brings with joy
The good befall’n him, Author unsuspect,°
Friendly to man, farr from deceit or guile.
What fear I then, rather what know to feare
Under this ignorance of good and Evil,
Of God or Death, of Law or Penaltie?
Here grows the Cure of all, this Fruit Divine,
Fair to the Eye, inviting to the Taste,
Of vertue° to make wise: what hinders then
To reach, and feed at once both Bodie and Mind?
So saying, her rash hand in evil hour
Forth reaching to the Fruit, she pluck’d, she eat:

powers
trial, test
utterance, eloquence

745–81. See Christian Doctrine, ch. 11, on the two parts of sin, evil desire and evil action.
781 eat. Ate, an accepted past tense, pronounced “et.”

implies
lack

in plain words

later bonds

begrudges
beyond suspicion

power

Book 9

785

790

795

800

805

810

815

Earth felt the wound, and Nature from her seat
Sighing through all her Works gave signs of woe,
That all was lost. Back to the Thicket slunk
The guiltie Serpent, and well might, for Eve
Intent now wholly on her taste, naught else
Regarded, such delight till then, as seemd,
In Fruit she never tasted, whether true
Or fansied so, through expectation high
Of knowledg, nor was God-head from her thought.
Greedily she ingorg’d without restraint,
And knew not eating Death: Satiate at length,
And hight’nd as with Wine, jocond° and boon,°
Thus to her self she pleasingly began.
O Sovran, vertuous,° precious of all Trees
In Paradise, of operation blest
To Sapience,° hitherto obscur’d, infam’d,°
And thy fair Fruit let hang, as to no end
Created; but henceforth my early care,
Not without Song, each Morning, and due praise
Shall tend thee, and the fertil burden ease
Of thy full branches offer’d free to all;
Till dieted by thee I grow mature
In knowledge, as the Gods who all things know;
Though others envie what they cannot give;
For had the gift bin theirs, it had not here
Thus grown. Experience, next to thee I owe,
Best guide; not following thee, I had remaind
In ignorance, thou op’nst Wisdoms way,
And giv’st access, though secret° she retire.
And I perhaps am secret; Heav’n is high,
High and remote to see from thence distinct
Each thing on Earth; and other care perhaps
May have diverted from continual watch
Our great Forbidder, safe with all his Spies
About him. But to Adam in what sort°
Shall I appeer? shall I to him make known
As yet my change, and give him to partake

239

merry / jolly
powerful
wisdom / slandered

hidden

guise

782–4. Earth felt the wound. Cf. Rom. 8:22: “we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in
pain together.” See also 9.1000–4 and 10.651–714.
795–807. Cf. Adam and Eve’s morning hymn (5:144–208).
804 Gods. Like Satan, Eve now refers to a pantheon of gods.

240

820

825

830

835

840

845

850

855
 
Full happiness with mee, or rather not,
But keep the odds° of Knowledge in my power
Without Copartner? so to add what wants°
In Femal Sex, the more to draw his Love,
And render me more equal, and perhaps,
A thing not undesireable, somtime
Superior: for inferior who is free?
This may be well: but what if God have seen,
And Death ensue? then I shall be no more,
And Adam wedded to another Eve,
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct;
A death to think. Confirm’d then I resolve,
Adam shall share with me in bliss or woe:
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths
I could endure, without him live no life.
So saying, from the Tree her step she turnd,
But first low Reverence don, as to the power
That dwelt within, whose presence had infus’d
Into the plant sciential° sap, deriv’d
From Nectar, drink of Gods. Adam the while
Waiting desirous her return, had wove
Of choicest Flours a Garland to adorne
Her Tresses, and her rural labours crown,
As Reapers oft are wont thir Harvest Queen.
Great joy he promis’d to his thoughts, and new
Solace in her return, so long delay’d;
Yet oft his heart, divine of° somthing ill,
Misgave him; hee the faultring measure° felt;
And forth to meet her went, the way she took
That Morn when first they parted; by the Tree
Of Knowledge he must pass, there he her met,
Scarse from the Tree returning; in her hand
A bough of fairest fruit that downie smil’d,
New gatherd, and ambrosial° smell diffus’d.
To him she hasted, in her face excuse
Came Prologue, and Apologie to prompt,
Which with bland° words at will she thus addrest.
Hast thou not wonderd, Adam, at my stay?

advantage
lacks

knowledge-inducing

anticipating
heartbeat

fragrant

smooth, coaxing

835–7 low Reverence. Eve’s idolatry of the “power” within the tree recalls the idolatrous reverence the rebel
angels offered to Satan (2.477–9).
853–4 excuse. Eve’s expression as she approached Adam first registered “excuse,” like the “Prologue” in a
play, and “Apologie” ( justification, self-defense) served as prompter to her speech.

Book 9

860

865

870

875

880

885

890

Thee I have misst, and thought it long, depriv’d
Thy presence, agonie of love till now
Not felt, nor shall be twice, for never more
Mean I to trie, what rash untri’d I sought,
The pain of absence from thy sight. But strange
Hath bin the cause, and wonderful to heare:
This Tree is not as we are told, a Tree
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown
Op’ning the way, but of Divine effect
To open Eyes, and make them Gods who taste;
And hath bin tasted such: the Serpent wise,
Or not restraind as wee, or not obeying,
Hath eat’n of the fruit, and is become,
Not dead, as we are threatn’d, but thenceforth
Endu’d with human voice and human sense,
Reasoning to admiration,° and with mee
Perswasively hath so prevaild, that I
Have also tasted, and have also found
Th’ effects to correspond, opener mine Eyes
Dimm erst,° dilated Spirits, ampler Heart,
And growing up to Godhead; which for thee
Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise.
For bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss,
Tedious, unshar’d with thee, and odious soon.
Thou therefore also taste, that equal Lot°
May joyne us, equal Joy, as equal Love;
Least thou not tasting, different degree°
Disjoyne us, and I then too late renounce
Deitie for thee, when Fate will not permit.
Thus Eve with Countnance blithe° her storie told;
But in her Cheek distemper flushing glowd.
On th’ other side, Adam, soon as he heard
The fatal Trespass don by Eve, amaz’d,
Astonied° stood and Blank,° while horror chill
Ran through his veins, and all his joynts relax’d;
From his slack hand the Garland wreath’d for Eve
Down drop’d, and all the faded Roses shed:
Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length

241

produce wonder

before

fortune, fate
rank

sprightly, merry

turned to stone / dazed

867 tasted. Proved by tasting, also, experienced, tested.
887 distemper. Disturbance of the balance of humors in the body, here causing agitation and wild excitement, marked by a hectic “flushing.”

242
 
895 First to himself he inward silence broke.

900

905

910

915

920

925

930

O fairest of Creation, last and best
Of all Gods works, Creature in whom excell’d
Whatever can to sight or thought be formd,
Holy, divine, good, amiable,° or sweet!
How art thou lost, how on a sudden lost,
Defac’t, deflourd, and now to Death devote?°
Rather how hast thou yeelded to transgress
The strict forbiddance, how to violate
The sacred Fruit forbidd’n! som cursed fraud
Of Enemie hath beguil’d thee, yet unknown,
And mee with thee hath ruind, for with thee
Certain my resolution is to Die;
How can I live without thee, how forgoe
Thy sweet Converse° and Love so dearly joyn’d,
To live again in these wilde Woods forlorn?
Should God create another Eve, and I
Another Rib afford, yet loss of thee
Would never from my heart; no no, I feel
The Link of Nature draw me: Flesh of Flesh,
Bone of my Bone thou art, and from thy State
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe.
So having said, as one from sad dismay
Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbd
Submitting to what seemd remediless,
Thus in calm mood his Words to Eve he turnd.
Bold deed thou hast presum’d, adventrous Eve
And peril great provok’t, who thus hath dar’d
Had it been onely coveting to Eye
That sacred Fruit, sacred° to abstinence,
Much more to taste it under banne to touch.
But past who can recall, or don undoe?
Not God Omnipotent, nor Fate, yet° so
Perhaps thou shalt not Die, perhaps the Fact°
Is not so hainous now, foretasted Fruit,
Profan’d first by the Serpent, by him first
Made common and unhallowd ere our taste;

lovable, lovely
doomed

conversation

set apart, consecrated

even
crime, deed

895–916. Compare Eve in soliloquy (816–33).
914–15. Adam echoes Gen. 2:23–4: “This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: . . . Therefore
shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.”
Cf. 8.495 above.

Book 9

935

940

945

950

955

960

965

970

Nor yet on him found deadly, he yet lives,
Lives, as thou saidst, and gaines to live as Man
Higher degree of Life, inducement strong
To us, as likely tasting to attaine
Proportional ascent, which cannot be
But to be Gods, or Angels Demi-gods.
Nor can I think that God, Creator wise,
Though threatning, will in earnest so destroy
Us his prime Creatures, dignifi’d so high,
Set over all his Works, which in our Fall,
For us created, needs with us must faile,
Dependent made; so God shall uncreate,
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour loose,
Not well conceav’d of God, who though his Power
Creation could repeate, yet would be loath
Us to abolish, least the Adversary°
Triumph and say; Fickle their State whom God
Most Favors, who can please him long; Mee first
He ruind, now Mankind; whom will he next?
Matter of scorne, not to be given the Foe,
However I with thee have fixt my Lot,
Certain° to undergoe like doom, if Death
Consort° with thee, Death is to mee as Life;
So forcible within my heart I feel
The Bond of Nature draw me to my owne,
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine;
Our State cannot be severd, we are one,
One Flesh; to loose thee were to loose my self.
So Adam, and thus Eve to him repli’d.
O glorious trial of exceeding° Love,
Illustrious evidence, example high!
Ingaging me to emulate, but short
Of thy perfection, how shall I attaine,
Adam, from whose deare side I boast me sprung,
And gladly of our Union heare thee speak,
One Heart, one Soul in both; whereof good prooff
This day affords, declaring thee resolvd,
Rather then Death or aught° then Death more dread
Shall separate us, linkt in Love so deare,
To undergoe with mee one Guilt, one Crime,

946–50. Cf. the Son’s plea at 3.156–64.

243

Satan

resolved
accompany

exceedingly great, excessive

anything other

244

975

980

985

990

995

1000

1005
 
If any be, of tasting this fair Fruit,
Whose vertue,° for of good still good proceeds,
Direct, or by occasion hath presented
This happie trial of thy Love, which else
So eminently never had bin known.
Were it° I thought Death menac’t would ensue°
This my attempt, I would sustain alone
The worst, and not perswade thee, rather die
Deserted, then oblige° thee with a fact°
Pernicious to thy Peace, chiefly assur’d
Remarkably so late of thy so true,
So faithful Love unequald; but I feel
Farr otherwise th’ event,° not Death, but Life
Augmented, op’nd Eyes, new Hopes, new Joyes,
Taste so Divine, that what of sweet before
Hath toucht my sense, flat seems to° this, and harsh.
On my experience, Adam, freely taste,
And fear of Death deliver to the Windes.
So saying, she embrac’d him, and for joy
Tenderly wept, much won that he his Love
Had so enobl’d, as of choice to incurr
Divine displeasure for her sake, or Death.
In recompence (for such compliance bad°
Such recompence best merits) from the bough
She gave him of that fair enticing Fruit
With liberal hand: he scrupl’d not to eat
Against his better knowledge, not deceav’d,
But fondly° overcome with Femal charm.
Earth trembl’d from her entrails, as again
In pangs, and Nature gave a second groan,
Skie lowr’d° and muttering Thunder, som sad drops
Wept at compleating of the mortal Sin
Original; while Adam took no thought,
Eating his fill, nor Eve to iterate°
Her former trespass fear’d, the more to soothe

power

if / result from

bind / deed

result

compared to

unworthy submission

foolishly, affectionately

threatened

repeat

974–5 Direct, or by occasion. The direct or indirect “good” of tasting the fruit has been the “happie trial”
of Adam’s love.
977–81. Cf. Eve’s earlier comment (826–33).
997–9. Cf. 1 Tim. 2:14: “And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression.”
1003–4 Sin / Original. The theological doctrine that all Adam’s descendants are stained by Adam’s sin and
thereby subject to physical death and (unless saved by grace) to damnation. Cf. Christian Doctrine 1.11.

Book 9

1010

1015

1020

1025

1030

1035

1040

Him with her lov’d societie, that now
As with new Wine intoxicated both
They swim in mirth, and fansie that they feel
Divinitie within them breeding wings
Wherewith to scorne the Earth: but that false Fruit
Farr other operation° first displaid,
Carnal desire enflaming, hee on Eve
Began to cast lascivious Eyes, she him
As wantonly repaid; in Lust they burne:
Till Adam thus ’gan Eve to dalliance° move.
Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste,
And elegant,° of Sapience° no small part,
Since to each meaning savour we apply,
And Palate call judicious; I the praise
Yeild thee, so well this day thou hast purvey’d.°
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstain’d
From this delightful Fruit, nor known till now
True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be
In things to us forbidden, it might be wish’d,
For this one Tree had bin forbidden ten.
But come, so well refresh’t, now let us play,°
As meet° is, after such delicious Fare;
For never did thy Beautie since the day
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorn’d
With all perfections, so enflame my sense
With ardor to enjoy thee, fairer now
Then ever, bountie of this vertuous Tree.
So said he, and forbore not glance or toy°
Of amorous intent, well understood
Of Eve, whose Eye darted contagious Fire.
Her hand he seis’d, and to a shadie bank,
Thick overhead with verdant roof imbowr’d
He led her nothing loath; Flours were the Couch,
Pansies, and Violets, and Asphodel,
And Hyacinth, Earths freshest softest lap.
There they thir fill of Love and Loves disport
Took largely, of thir mutual guilt the Seale,

245

effect

erotic play
refined / wisdom, taste

provided food

have sex
appropriate

caress

1026 ten. Looks forward to the Mosaic covenant, with its ten commandments.
1029–32. Echoes Zeus’ amorous invitation to Hera (Iliad 14.314 –28), and also Paris to Helen (Iliad 3.441– 6).
1037. Cf. other places where Adam and Eve join and disjoin hands: 4.321, 488 – 9, 9.385– 6, 12.648.
1039–45. Cf. Adam and Eve’s lovemaking in innocence: 4:705–10, 738 – 43, 771–3.

246

1045

1050

1055

1060

1065

1070

1075
 
The solace of thir sin, till dewie sleep
Oppress’d them, wearied with thir amorous play.
Soon as the force of that fallacious° Fruit,
That with exhilerating vapour bland°
About thir spirits had plaid, and inmost powers
Made erre, was now exhal’d, and grosser sleep
Bred of unkindly° fumes, with conscious° dreams
Encumberd, now had left them, up they rose
As from unrest, and each the other viewing,
Soon found thir Eyes how op’nd, and thir minds
How dark’nd; innocence, that as a veile
Had shadow’d them from knowing ill, was gon,
Just confidence, and native righteousness
And honour from about them, naked left
To guiltie shame: hee cover’d, but his Robe
Uncover’d more. So rose the Danite strong
Herculean Samson from the Harlot-lap
Of Philistean Dalilah, and wak’d
Shorn of his strength, They destitute° and bare
Of all thir vertue: silent, and in face
Confounded long they sate, as struck’n mute,
Till Adam, though not less then Eve abasht,
At length gave utterance to these words constraind.°
O Eve, in evil hour thou didst give eare
To that false Worm, of whomsoever taught
To counterfet Mans voice, true in our Fall,
False in our promis’d Rising; since our Eyes
Op’nd we find indeed, and find we know
Both Good and Evil, Good lost, and Evil got,
Bad Fruit of Knowledge, if this be to know,
Which leaves us naked thus, of Honour void,
Of Innocence, of Faith, of Puritie,
Our wonted° Ornaments now soild and staind,

deceptive
pleasing

unnatural / guilty

bereft

forced

former

1058–9 hee. “shame” now “cover’d” them, but revealed (“Uncover’d”) their guilt.
1059–62 Danite. Samson, of the tribe of Dan, told the Philistine “Harlot” “Dalilah” that the secret of his great
strength lay in his hair; she sheared it off while he slept, and when he awoke he was easily captured by
his enemies and blinded.
1067 Eve, in evil hour. Adam’s bitter pun suggests a false etymology for Eve’s name and repudiates the actual
etymology, “life,” which Adam will later reaffirm (11.159– 61).
1071–3. Adam, like most commentators, derives the tree’s name, the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil,
from its effect. Cf. Christian Doctrine 1.10: “since Adam tasted it, we not only know evil, but we know
good only by means of evil.”

Book 9

1080

1085

1090

1095

1100

1105

1110

And in our Faces evident the signes
Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store;
Even shame, the last of evils; of the first
Be sure then. How shall I behold the face
Henceforth of God or Angel, earst° with joy
And rapture so oft beheld? those heav’nly shapes
Will dazle now this earthly, with thir blaze
Insufferably bright. O might I here
In solitude live savage, in some glade
Obscur’d, where highest Woods impenetrable
To Starr or Sun-light, spread thir umbrage° broad,
And brown as Evening: Cover me ye Pines,
Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs
Hide me, where I may never see them more.
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise
What best may for the present serve to hide
The Parts of each from other, that seem most
To shame obnoxious,° and unseemliest seen,
Some Tree whose broad smooth Leaves together sowd,
And girded on our loyns, may cover round
Those middle parts, that this new commer, Shame,
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean.
So counsel’d hee, and both together went
Into the thickest Wood, there soon they chose
The Figtree, not that kind for Fruit renown’d,
But such as at this day to Indians known
In Malabar or Decan spreds her Armes
Braunching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended Twigs take root, and Daughters grow
About the Mother Tree, a Pillard° shade
High overarch’t, and echoing Walks between;
There oft the Indian Herdsman shunning heate
Shelters in coole, and tends his pasturing Herds
At Loopholes cut through thickest shade: Those Leaves
They gatherd, broad as Amazonian Targe,

247

formerly

shadow

exposed

as pillars

1078–80 concupiscence. The theological term for the unruly human passions and desires seen as one effect
of the Fall, and causing an abundance (“store”) of evils. “Shame” is the “last” evil, the “first” is the “foul
concupiscence” that produces it.
1095–1110 broad smooth leaves. The banyan, or Indian fig tree, has small leaves, but the account Milton
draws on from Gerard’s Herbal (1597) contains the several details related in these lines. “Malabar” and “Decan”
(Deccan) are in southern India.
1111 Amazonian Targe. Shield of the Amazons, female warriors of Greek myth.

248

1115

1120

1125

1130

1135

1140

1145
 
And with what skill they had, together sowd,
To gird thir waste, vain Covering if to hide
Thir guilt and dreaded shame; O how unlike
To that first naked Glorie. Such of late
Columbus found th’ American so girt
belt
With featherd Cincture,° naked else and wilde
Among the Trees on Iles and woodie Shores.
Thus fenc’t, and as they thought, thir shame in part
Coverd, but not at rest or ease of Mind,
They sate them down to weep, nor onely Teares
Raind at thir Eyes, but high Winds worse within
Began to rise, high Passions, Anger, Hate,
Mistrust, Suspicion, Discord, and shook sore
Thir inward State of Mind, calm Region once
And full of Peace, now tost and turbulent:
For Understanding rul’d not, and the Will
Heard not her lore, both in subjection now
To sensual Appetite, who from beneathe
Usurping over sovran Reason claimd
Superior sway: From thus distemperd brest,
Adam, estrang’d° in look and alterd stile,°
Speech intermitted° thus to Eve renewd.
interrupted
Would thou hadst heark’nd to my words, and stai’d
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange
Desire of wandring this unhappie Morn,
I know not whence possessd thee; we had then
Remaind still happie, not as now, despoild
Of all our good, sham’d, naked, miserable.
give proof of
Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve°
The Faith they owe; when earnestly they seek
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to faile.
To whom soon mov’d with touch of blame thus Eve.
What words have past thy Lips, Adam severe,
Imput’st thou that to my default, or will
Of wandring, as thou call’st it, which who knows

1120–31. The immediate psychological effects of the Fall are seen in the subjection of reason and will to the
lower faculties of sensual appetite.
1136, 1144 wandring, severe. Both words now take on their fallen meanings. In unfallen Eden wandering
is blameless (4.234, 8.312); at 4.293–4 “severe” means “austerely simple”; here it means “harsh.”
1144 What words . . . Lips. A Homeric formula.

belt
unlike himself / manner of speech
interrupted
give proof of

Book 9

1150

1155

1160

1165

1170

1175

1180

1185

But might as ill have happ’nd thou being by,
Or to thy self perhaps: hadst thou been there,
Or here th’ attempt, thou couldst not have discernd
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake;
No ground of enmitie between us known,
Why hee should mean me ill, or seek to harme.
Was I to have never parted from thy side?
As good have grown there still a liveless Rib.
Being as I am, why didst not thou the Head
Command me absolutely not to go,
Going into such danger as thou saidst?
Too facil° then thou didst not much gainsay,
Nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss.
Hadst thou bin firm and fixt in thy dissent,
Neither had I transgress’d, nor thou with mee.
To whom then first incenst Adam repli’d,
Is this the Love, is this the recompence
Of mine to thee, ingrateful Eve, exprest
Immutable° when thou wert lost, not I,
Who might have liv’d and joyd° immortal bliss,
Yet willingly chose rather Death with thee:
And am I now upbraided, as the cause
Of thy transgressing? not enough severe,
It seems, in thy restraint: what could I more?
I warn’d thee, I admonish’d thee, foretold
The danger, and the lurking Enemie
That lay in wait; beyond this had bin force,
And force upon free will hath here no place.
But confidence then bore thee on, secure°
Either to meet no danger, or to finde
Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps
I also err’d in overmuch admiring
What seemd in thee so perfet, that I thought
No evil durst attempt thee, but I rue
That errour now, which is become my crime,
And thou th’ accuser. Thus it shall befall
Him who to worth in Women overtrusting
Lets her will rule; restraint she will not brook,°
And left to her self, if evil thence ensue,

1155 Head. see 1 Cor. 11:3, cited at 8.574n above.

249

easy, mild

unchangable
enjoyed

overconfident

accept

250
 
Shee first his weak indulgence will accuse.
Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning,
And of thir vain contest appeer’d no end.
The End of the Ninth Book.

BOOK 10
THE ARGUMENT

5

10

15

20

Mans transgression known, the Guardian Angels forsake Paradise, and return up
to Heaven to approve thir vigilance, and are approv’d, God declaring that The
entrance of Satan could not be by them prevented. He sends his Son to judge the
Transgressors, who descends and gives Sentence accordingly; then in pity cloaths
them both, and reascends. Sin and Death sitting till then at the Gates of Hell, by wondrous sympathie feeling the success of Satan in this new World, and the sin by Man
there committed, resolve to sit no longer confin’d in Hell, but to follow Satan thir
Sire up to the place of Man: To make the way easier from Hell to this World to and
fro, they pave a broad Highway or Bridge over Chaos, according to the Track that
Satan first made; then preparing for Earth, they meet him proud of his success returning to Hell; thir mutual gratulation. Satan arrives at Pandemonium, in full assembly
relates with boasting his success against Man; instead of applause is entertained with
a general hiss by all his audience, transform’d with himself also suddenly into
Serpents, according to his doom giv’n in Paradise; then deluded with a shew of the
forbidden Tree springing up before them, they greedily reaching to take of the Fruit,
chew dust and bitter ashes. The proceedings of Sin and Death; God foretels the final
Victory of his Son over them, and the renewing of all things; but for the present
commands his Angels to make several alterations in the Heavens and Elements. Adam
more and more perceiving his fall’n condition heavily bewailes, rejects the condolement of Eve; she persists and at length appeases him: then to evade the Curse likely
to fall on thir Ofspring, proposes to Adam violent wayes which he approves not, but
conceiving better hope, puts her in mind of the late Promise made them, that her
Seed should be reveng’d on the Serpent, and exhorts her with him to seek Peace of
the offended Deity, by repentance and supplication.

Meanwhile the hainous and despightfull act
Of Satan done in Paradise, and how
Hee in the Serpent, had perverted Eve,
Her Husband shee, to taste the fatall fruit,
5 Was known in Heav’n; for what can scape the Eye
Of God All-seeing, or deceave his Heart
Omniscient, who in all things wise and just,
Hinder’d not Satan to attempt the minde
Of Man, with strength entire,° and free will arm’d,
10 Complete° to have discover’d and repulst

2 approve. Make proof of.
approved. Pronounced good.
6 sympathie. Influence at a distance.

unimpaired
fully equipped

252

15

20

25

30

35

40

45
 
Whatever wiles of Foe or seeming Friend.
For still° they knew, and ought to have still° remember’d
The high Injunction not to taste that Fruit,
Whoever tempted; which they not obeying,
Incurr’d, what could they less, the penaltie,
And manifold in sin, deserv’d to fall.
Up into Heav’n from Paradise in haste
Th’ Angelic Guards ascended, mute and sad
For Man, for of his state by this° they knew,
Much wondring how the suttle Fiend had stoln
Entrance unseen. Soon as th’ unwelcome news
From Earth arriv’d at Heaven Gate, displeas’d
All were who heard, dim sadness did not spare
That time Celestial visages, yet mixt
With pitie, violated not thir bliss.
About the new-arriv’d, in multitudes
Th’ ethereal People ran, to hear and know
How all befell: they towards the Throne Supream
Accountable made haste to make appear
With righteous plea, thir utmost vigilance,
And easily approv’d; when the most High
Eternal Father from his secret Cloud,
Amidst in Thunder utter’d thus his voice.
Assembl’d Angels, and ye Powers return’d
From unsuccessful charge, be not dismaid,
Nor troubl’d at these tidings from the Earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent,
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this Tempter cross’d the Gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail and speed°
On his bad Errand, Man should be seduc’t
And flatter’d out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker; no Decree of mine
Concurring° to necessitate his Fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free Will, to her own inclining left

always

this time

succeed

agreeing

16 manifold in sin. Having multiple sins. In Christian Doctrine 1.11 Milton suggests that no sin “can be named,
which was not included in this one act.”
29 Accountable. Liable to be called to answer for how they fulfilled their duties (guarding Paradise).
31 easily approv’d. Their plea of “utmost vigilance” was readily accepted.
38–9 Foretold so lately. Cf. 3.80–96.
43–7 no Decree of mine. Cf. 3.96–128.

Book 10

50

55

60

65

70

75

In eevn scale. But fall’n he is, and now
What rests° but that the mortal Sentence pass
On his transgression, Death denounc’t that day,
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he fear’d,
By some immediate stroak; but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bountie scorn’d.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee
Vicegerent° Son, to thee I have transferr’d
All Judgement, whether in Heav’n, or Earth, or Hell.
Easie it might be seen that I intend
Mercie collegue with Justice, sending thee
Mans Friend, his Mediator, his design’d
Both Ransom and Redeemer voluntarie,
And destin’d Man himself to judge Man fall’n.
So spake the Father, and unfoulding bright
Toward the right hand his Glorie, on the Son
Blaz’d forth unclouded Deitie; he full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Express’d, and thus divinely answer’d milde.
Father Eternal, thine is to decree,
Mine both in Heav’n and Earth to do thy will
Supream, that thou in mee thy Son belov’d
Mayst ever rest well pleas’d. I go to judge
On Earth these thy transgressors, but thou knowst,
Whoever judg’d, the worst on mee must light,
When time shall be, for so I undertook
Before thee; and not repenting, this obtaine
Of right, that I may mitigate thir doom
On me deriv’d,° yet I shall temper so
Justice with Mercie, as may illustrate most°

253

remains

deputy ruler

diverted
best show

49–50 Death denounc’t. Formally proclaimed; cf. Gen. 2:17: “But of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.” Cf. PL 8:323–33.
53 Forbearance no acquittance. God’s restraint (“Forbearance”) in exacting punishment does not “acquit”
Adam of the punishment due. “Omittance is not quittance” was a proverb.
54. i.e., my justice must not be “scorn’d” as my generosity (“bountie”) has been.
56–7 All Judgement. Cf. John 5:22: “For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto
the Son.”
60–1 Mediator. Cf. Christian Doctrine 1.15, “The mediatorial office of Christ is that whereby . . . he voluntarily performed, and continues to perform, on behalf of man, whatever is requisite for obtaining reconciliation with God, and eternal salvation.”
70 Son belov’d. Cf. Matt. 3:17: “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.”

254

80

85

90

95

100

105

110

115
 
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor Train,° where none
Are to behold the Judgement, but the judg’d,
Those two; the third best absent is condemn’d,
Convict° by flight, and Rebel to all Law
Conviction° to the Serpent none belongs.
Thus saying, from his radiant Seat he rose
Of high collateral° glorie: him Thrones and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant°
Accompanied to Heaven Gate, from whence
Eden and all the Coast° in prospect lay.
Down he descended strait; the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes wing’d.
Now was the Sun in Western cadence° low
From Noon, and gentle Aires due at thir hour
To fan the Earth now wak’d, and usher in
The Eevning coole when he from wrauth more coole
Came the mild Judge and Intercessor both
To sentence Man: the voice of God they heard
Now walking in the Garden, by soft windes
Brought to thir Ears, while day declin’d, they heard,
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest Trees, both Man and Wife, till God
Approaching, thus to Adam call’d aloud.
Where art thou Adam, wont° with joy to meet
My coming seen far off ? I miss thee here,
Not pleas’d, thus entertaind with solitude,
Where obvious° dutie erewhile appear’d unsaught:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth.
He came, and with him Eve, more loth, though first
To offend, discount’nanc’t both, and discompos’d;
Love was not in thir looks, either to God
Or to each other, but apparent° guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despaire,
Anger, and obstinacie, and hate, and guile.
Whence Adam faultring long, thus answer’d brief.

retinue

proved guilty
judgment of guilt
side by side
ministering
region

falling mode

used before

plain, coming forward

manifest

90–1 strait. Immediate; cf. Raphael’s journey from heaven to earth (8.110 –14).
92–102. Cf. Gen. 3:8: “And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the
day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the
garden.”

Book 10

120

125

130

135

140

145

150

I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice
Affraid, being naked, hid my self. To whom
The gracious Judge without revile° repli’d.
My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not fear’d,
But still° rejoyc’t, how is it now become
So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who
Hath told thee? hast thou eaten of the Tree
Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat?
To whom thus Adam sore beset repli’d.
O Heav’n! in evil strait this day I stand
Before my Judge, either to undergoe
My self the total Crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life;
Whose failing, while her Faith to me remaines,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint; but strict necessitie
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint
Least on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolv’d;° though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Wouldst easily detect what I conceale.
This Woman whom thou mad’st to be my help,
And gav’st me as thy perfet gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so Divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in it self,
Her doing seem’d to justifie the deed;
Shee gave me of the Tree, and I did eate.
To whom the sovran Presence thus repli’d.
Was shee thy God, that her thou didst obey
Before his voice, or was shee made thy guide,
Superior, or but° equal, that to her
Thou did’st resigne thy Manhood, and the Place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection farr excell’d

255

reproach, abuse
always

descended

merely

121–3. Cf. Gen. 3:11, “And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof
I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?”
137–43. Compare Adam’s speech in Gen. 3:12, “The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me
of the tree, and I did eat.”
148–50 of thee, / And for thee. Cf. 1 Cor. 11:8–9, “For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of
the man. Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the man.”

256

155

160

165

170

175

180
 
Hers in all real dignitie: Adornd
She was indeed, and lovely to attract
Thy Love, not thy Subjection, and her Gifts
Were such as under Government well seem’d,
Unseemly to beare rule, which was thy part°
And person,° hadst thou known thy self aright.
So having said, he thus to Eve in few:°
Say Woman, what is this which thou hast done?
To whom sad Eve with shame nigh overwhelm’d,
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abasht repli’d.
The Serpent me beguil’d and I did eate.
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To Judgement he proceeded on th’ accus’d
Serpent though brute, unable to transferre
The Guilt on him who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end°
Of his Creation; justly then accurst,
As vitiated° in Nature: more to know
Concern’d not Man (since he no further knew)
Nor alter’d his offence; yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom apply’d
Though in mysterious° terms, judg’d as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.
Because thou hast done this, thou art accurst
Above all Cattle, each Beast of the Field;
Upon thy Belly groveling thou shalt goe,
And dust shalt eat all the dayes of thy Life.
Between Thee and the Woman I will put
Enmitie, and between thine and her Seed;
Her Seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.
So spake this Oracle, then verifi’d

role
character (persona)
few words

purpose
corrupted

symbolic

157–62. Cf. Gen. 3:13, “And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the
woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.”
165–7. i.e., the serpent was “unable” to “transferre” his own “Guilt” in being “polluted” to Satan, who made
him his “instrument.”
169–70 more to know. Adam and Eve cannot now understand the terms of the judgment on the serpent.
175–8. Cf. Gen. 3:14, which these lines closely paraphrase.
179–81. Cf. Gen. 3:15: “And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.” This is the “protoevangelium,” or judgment
of Satan in the serpent, that contains the promise of the redeemer, the woman’s “Seed.” Adam and Eve
do not fully understand it until 12.429–33, 598–605.

Book 10

185

190

195

200

205

210

When Jesus son of Mary second Eve,
Saw Satan fall like Lightning down from Heav’n,
Prince of the Aire; then rising from his Grave
Spoild° Principalities and Powers, triumpht
In open shew, and with ascention bright
Captivity led captive through the Aire,
The Realm it self of Satan long usurpt,
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet;
Eevn hee who now foretold his fatal bruise,
And to the Woman thus his Sentence turn’d.
Thy sorrow I will greatly multiplie
By thy Conception; Children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will
Thine shall submit, hee over thee shall rule.
On Adam last thus judgement he pronounc’d.
Because thou hast heark’nd to the voice of thy Wife,
And eaten of the Tree concerning which
I charg’d thee, saying: Thou shalt not eate thereof,
Curs’d is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow
Shalt eate thereof all the days of thy Life;
Thorns also and Thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid, and thou shalt eate th’ Herb of th’ Field,
In the sweat of thy Face shalt thou eat Bread,
Till thou return unto the ground, for thou
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy Birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust returne.
So judg’d he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent,
And th’ instant stroke of Death denounc’t° that day

257

defeated

announced

183–4. Cf. Jesus’ comment to his disciples (Luke 10:18), “I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven.”
185–8 Prince of the Aire. Cf. Eph. 2:2, where Satan is called “prince of the power of the air”; Col. 2:15, which
states that Christ, “having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a shew of them openly, triumphing
over them”; and Eph. 4:8, declaring that when Christ “ascended up on high, he led captivity captive.”
193–6. Cf. Gen. 3:16: “Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in
sorrow thou shalt bring forth children, and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.”
In Christian Doctrine 1.10 Milton claimed that after the Fall the husband’s power over his wife was
increased.
197–208. Cf. Gen. 3:17–19: “And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy
wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the
ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; Thorns also and thistles shall it
bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou
return.”

258

215

220

225

230

235

240

245
 
Remov’d farr off; then pittying how they stood
Before him naked to the aire, that now
Must suffer change, disdain’d not to begin
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume,
As when he wash’d his servants feet so now
As Father of his Familie he clad
Thir nakedness with Skins of Beasts, or° slain,
Or as the Snake with youthful Coate repaid;
And thought not much° to cloath his Enemies:
Nor hee thir outward onely with the Skins
Of Beasts, but inward nakedness, much more
Opprobrious, with his Robe of righteousness,
Araying cover’d from his Fathers sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returnd,
Into his blissful bosom reassum’d
In glory as of old, to him appeas’d
All, though all-knowing, what had past with Man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Meanwhile ere thus was sin’d and judg’d on Earth,
Within the Gates of Hell sate Sin and Death,
In counterview° within the Gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous° flame
Farr into Chaos, since the Fiend pass’d through,
Sin opening, who thus now to Death began.
O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idlely, while Satan our great Author° thrives
In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides
For us his ofspring deare? It cannot be
But that success attends him; if mishap,
Ere this he had return’d, with fury driv’n
By his Avengers, since no place like° this
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
Wings growing, and Dominion giv’n me large
Beyond this Deep; whatever drawes me on,
Or sympathie,° or som connatural° force
Powerful at greatest distance to unite

either
too much

facing each other
enormous, unrestrained

father, originator

as well as

attraction / innate

214–17 form of servant. Cf. Phil. 2:7; John 13:5 tells of Jesus washing his disciples’ feet; Gen. 3:21 records
that the “Lord God made coats of skins, and clothed” Adam and Eve.
222–3. Cf. Isa. 61:10: “he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness.”

Book 10

250

255

260

265

270

275

280

285

With secret amity things of like kinde
By secretest conveyance.° Thou my Shade
Inseparable must° with mee along:
For Death from Sin no power can separate.
But least the difficultie of passing back
Stay his return perhaps over this Gulfe
Impassable, Impervious,° let us try
Adventrous work, yet to thy power and mine
Not unagreeable, to found° a path
Over this Maine° from Hell to that new World
Where Satan now prevailes, a Monument
Of merit high to all th’ infernal Host,
Easing thir passage hence, for intercourse,°
Or transmigration,° as thir lot shall lead.
Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn
By this new felt attraction and instinct.
Whom thus the meager° Shadow answerd soon.
Goe whither Fate and inclination strong
Leads thee, I shall not lag behinde, nor erre°
The way, thou leading, such a sent I draw°
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste
The savour of Death from all things there that live:
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid.
So saying, with delight he snuff ’d° the smell
Of mortal change on Earth. As when a flock
Of ravenous Fowl, though many a League remote,
Against° the day of Battel, to a Field,
Where Armies lie encampt, come flying, lur’d
With sent of living Carcasses design’d°
For death, the following day, in bloodie fight.
So sented the grim Feature,° and upturn’d
His Nostril wide into the murkie Air,
Sagacious° of his Quarry from so farr.
Then Both from out Hell Gates into the waste
Wide Anarchie of Chaos damp and dark
Flew divers,° and with Power (thir Power was great)
Hovering upon the Waters; what they met
Solid or slimie, as in raging Sea
Tost up and down, together crowded drove
From each side shoaling° towards the mouth of Hell.
As when two Polar Winds blowing adverse°

259

communication
must go

impenetrable
build
expanse (Chaos)

passing back and forth
emigration

emaciated
wander from
inhale

sniffed

anticipating
marked out
form, shape
keenly smelling, wise

in different directions

assembling
from opposite directions

260
 
290 Upon the Cronian Sea, together drive

295

300

305

310

315

320

Mountains of Ice, that stop th’ imagin’d way
Beyond Petsora Eastward, to the rich
Cathaian Coast. The aggregated Soyle
Death with his Mace petrific,° cold and dry,
As with a Trident smote, and fix’t as firm
As Delos floating once; the rest his look
Bound with Gorgonian rigor not to move,
And with Asphaltic slime,° broad as the Gate,
Deep to the Roots of Hell the gather’d beach°
They fasten’d, and the Mole° immense wraught on
Over the foaming deep high Archt, a Bridge
Of length prodigious joyning to the Wall°
Immovable of this now fenceless° world
Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad,
Smooth, easie, inoffensive° down to Hell.
So, if great things to small may be compar’d,
Xerxes, the Libertie of Greece to yoke,
From Susa his Memnonian Palace high
Came to the Sea, and over Hellespont
Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joyn’d,
And scourg’d with many a stroak th’ indignant waves.
Now had they brought the work by wondrous Art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendent Rock
Over the vext° Abyss, following the track
Of Satan, to the self same place where hee
First lighted from his Wing, and landed safe
From out of Chaos to the out side bare
Of this round World: with Pinns of Adamant
And Chains they made all fast,° too fast they made
And durable; and now in little space
The confines° met of Empyrean Heav’n

turning things to stone

pitch
ridge of stones
causeway, sea wall
outer shell
defenseless
unobstructed

tossed by storms

secure
boundaries

290–3 Cronian Sea. The Arctic Ocean.
th’imagin’d way. The northeast passage from Pechora
(“Petsora”), a river in Siberia, to north China (Cathay) which Henry Hudson looked for in 1608 but could
only imagine because it was blocked by ice.
294–6 Mace petrific. Death’s materials are the “cold and dry” elements. His mace is associated with
Neptune’s “Trident,” which was said to have “fix’t” the “floating” Greek island “Delos.”
297 Gorgonian rigor. The Gorgon Medusa turned to stone anything she looked upon.
306 great things to small. A familiar Virgilian formula.
307–11. The Persian king “Xerxes” ordered the sea whipped when it destroyed the bridge of ships he built
over the Hellespont ( joining “Europe with Asia”), so as to invade Greece. Susa. The biblical Shusan, Xerxes’
winter residence, was founded by the mythical Prince Memnon (“Memnonian Palace”).
313 Pontifical. Bridge-building, with a pun on “papal.” The pope had the title Pontifex Maximus.

Book 10

325

330

335

340

345

350

355

And of this World, and on the left hand Hell
With long reach interpos’d; three sev’ral wayes
In sight, to each of these three places led.
And now thir way to Earth they had descri’d,
To Paradise first tending, when behold
Satan in likeness of an Angel bright
Betwixt the Centaure and the Scorpion stearing
His Zenith, while the Sun in Aries rose:
Disguis’d he came, but those his Children dear
Thir Parent soon discern’d, though in disguise.
Hee after Eve seduc’t, unminded° slunk
Into the Wood fast by, and changing shape
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act
By Eve, though all unweeting,° seconded
Upon her Husband, saw thir shame that sought
Vain covertures;° but when he saw descend
The Son of God to judge them terrifi’d
Hee fled, not hoping to escape, but shun
The present, fearing guiltie what his wrauth
Might suddenly inflict; that past, return’d
By Night, and listening where the hapless Paire
Sate in thir sad discourse, and various plaint,
Thence gatherd his own doom, which understood
Not instant, but of future time. With joy
And tidings fraught,° to Hell he now return’d,
And at the brink of Chaos, neer the foot°
Of this new wondrous Pontifice,° unhop’t
Met who to meet him came, his Ofspring dear.
Great joy was at thir meeting, and at sight
Of that stupendious Bridge his joy encreas’d.
Long hee admiring stood, till Sin, his faire
Inchanting Daughter, thus the silence broke.
O Parent, these are thy magnific deeds,
Thy Trophies, which thou view’st as not thine own,

261

unnoticed

unaware
garments

laden
end
bridge

323–4 three sev’ral wayes. The golden staircase or chain linking the universe to Heaven (3.510 –18); the
new bridge linking it to Hell; and the passage through the spheres down to earth (3:526 – 9).
328–9. Satan steered between Sagittarius (“the Centaure”) and Scorpio, thereby passing through Anguis, the
constellation of the Serpent.
342–5 listening. Satan evidently heard the “discourse” and “plaints” of Adam and Eve at 10.720–1096), which
thus precede his return to Hell; he also concluded that his own “doom” was “of future time.”
355 Trophies. Objects or persons captured in battle displayed in the triumphs accorded Roman generals and
emperors who won great military victories; here, the bridge itself is a trophy of victory.

262

360

365

370

375

380

385

390
 
Thou art thir Author and prime Architect:
For I no sooner in my Heart divin’d,
My Heart, which by a secret harmonie
Still° moves with thine, join’d in connexion sweet,
That thou on Earth hadst prosper’d, which thy looks
Now also evidence, but straight I felt
Though distant from thee Worlds between, yet felt
That I must after thee with this thy Son;
Such fatal consequence° unites us three:
Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds,
Nor this unvoyageable Gulf obscure
Detain from following thy illustrious track.
Thou hast atchiev’d our libertie, confin’d
Within Hell Gates till now, thou us impow’rd
To fortifie thus farr, and overlay
With this portentous° Bridge the dark Abyss.
Thine now is all this World, thy vertue° hath won
What thy hands builded not, thy Wisdom gain’d
With odds° what Warr hath lost, and fully aveng’d
Our foile° in Heav’n; here thou shalt Monarch reign,
There didst not; there let him still Victor sway,
As Battel hath adjudg’d, from this new World
Retiring, by his own doom° alienated,
And henceforth Monarchie with thee divide
Of all things parted by th’ Empyreal bounds,
His Quadrature, from thy Orbicular World,
Or trie° thee now more dang’rous to his Throne.
Whom thus the Prince of Darkness answerd glad.
Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both,
High proof ye now have giv’n to be the Race
Of Satan (for I glorie in the name,
Antagonist of Heav’ns Almightie King)
Amply have merited of me, of all
Th’ infernal Empire, that so neer Heav’ns dore
Triumphal with triumphal act have met,

always

relation of cause and effect

marvelous, ominous
power, courage
advantage
defeat

judgment

find by experience

381 Quadrature. The New Jerusalem is described as “foursquare” in Rev. 21:16. Satan’s new conquest, earth,
is an orb (“Orbicular”), so Sin implies its superiority since a sphere was thought to be more perfect than
a cube. Cf. PL 2.1048, where Heaven is said to be “undetermind square or round.”
386–7 Antagonist. The name “Satan” means Adversary or Antagonist.
390. The repeated word emphasizes that Satan is enacting a triumph, passing over a triumphal bridge rather
than through triumphal arches; the scene would likely evoke the Roman-style triumphal processions and
arches celebrating the Restoration of Charles II.

Book 10

395

400

405

410

415

420

425

Mine with this glorious Work, and made one Realm
Hell and this World, one Realm, one Continent°
Of easie thorough-fare. Therefore while I
Descend through Darkness, on your Rode with ease
To my associate Powers, them to acquaint
With these successes, and with them rejoyce,
You two this way, among these numerous Orbs
All yours, right down to Paradise descend;
There dwell and Reign in bliss, thence on the Earth
Dominion exercise and in the Aire,
Chiefly on Man, sole Lord of all declar’d,
Him first make sure your thrall,° and lastly kill.
My Substitutes I send ye, and Create
Plenipotent° on Earth, of matchless might
Issuing from mee: on your joynt vigor now
My hold of this new Kingdom all depends,
Through Sin to Death expos’d by my exploit.
If your joynt power prevailes, th’ affaires of Hell
No detriment° need feare, goe and be strong.
So saying he dismiss’d them, they with speed
Thir course through thickest Constellations held
Spreading thir bane;° the blasted° Starrs lookt wan,
And Planets, Planet-strook, real Eclips
Then sufferd. Th’ other way Satan went down
The Causey° to Hell Gate; on either side
Disparted° Chaos over built° exclaimd,
And with rebounding surge the barrs assaild,
That scorn’d his indignation: through the Gate,
Wide open and unguarded, Satan pass’d,
And all about found desolate; for those
Appointed to sit there, had left thir charge,
Flown to the upper World; the rest were all
Farr to the inland retir’d, about the walls
Of Pandæmonium, Citie and proud seate
Of Lucifer, so by allusion calld,
Of that bright Starr to Satan paragond.°
There kept thir Watch the Legions, while the Grand

263

continuous land mass

slave
with full power and authority

injury

poison / ruined

causeway
divided / built over

compared

413–14 Planet-strook. The planets, stricken as by the malign influence of an adverse planet, suffered not
merely a temporary but a “real Eclips,” a permanent loss of light.
424–6 Pandæmonium. Literally “place of all demons”; it is termed the “seate” of “Lucifer” (Satan’s name before
his fall), in allusion to and comparison with the morning star named Lucifer (the light-bringer).
427 the Grand. “the grand infernal Peers” (cf. 2.507).

264

430

435

440

445

450

455
 
In Council sate, sollicitous° what chance
Might intercept thir Emperour sent, so hee
Departing gave command, and they observ’d.°
As when the Tartar from his Russian Foe
By Astracan over the Snowie Plaines
Retires, or Bactrian Sophi from the hornes
Of Turkish Crescent, leaves all waste beyond
The Realm of Aladule, in his retreate
To Tauris or Casbeen. So these the late
Heav’n-banisht Host, left desert utmost Hell
Many a dark League, reduc’t° in careful Watch
Round thir Metropolis, and now expecting
Each hour thir great adventurer from the search
Of Forrein Worlds: he through the midst unmarkt,°
In shew Plebeian Angel militant
Of lowest order, past; and from the dore
Of that Plutonian Hall, invisible
Ascended his high Throne, which under state°
Of richest texture spred, at th’ upper end
Was plac’t in regal lustre. Down a while
He sate, and round about him saw unseen:
At last as from a Cloud his fulgent° head
And shape Starr bright appeer’d, or brighter, clad
With what permissive° glory since his fall
Was left him, or false glitter: All amaz’d
At that so sudden blaze the Stygian throng
Bent thir aspect,° and whom they wish’d beheld,
Thir mighty Chief returnd: loud was th’ acclaime:
Forth rush’d in haste the great consulting Peers,
Rais’d from thir dark Divan,° and with like joy
Congratulant approach’d him, who with hand

anxious about
obeyed

led back

unnoticed

canopy

shining, resplendent
permitted

turned their gaze

Turkish Council of State

429–39 the Tartar. The simile compares the fallen angels’ withdrawal from other regions of Hell to guard
their metropolis to Tartars retiring before attacking Russians and to Persians retreating before attacking
Turks.
Astracan. A Tartar region near the mouth of the Volga, annexed by Ivan the Terrible in
1556.
Bactrian Sophi. Persian Shah (Bactria, modern Afghanistan, was a province of Persia).
Turkish Crescent. Refers both to the Turkish battle formations and to their emblem.
Realm of
Aladule. Armenia, whose last Persian ruler before the Turkish conquest, named Aladule, was forced to
retreat before the Turks to Tabriz (“Tauris”) in northwest Persia (Iran) or to Kazvin (“Casbeen”), north of
Tehran.
441–55. Satan’s invisble entry and sudden blazing forth recall the sudden appearance of the Sultan, Solimano,
in Tasso, Gerusalemme Liberata 10:32–50.
444 Plutonian. Infernal, from Pluto, the classical god who rules the underworld.
453 Stygian. Of the river Styx in Hades, the river of hate.

Book 10

460

465

470

475

480

485

490

495

Silence, and with these words attention won.
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,
For in possession such, not onely of right,
I call ye and declare ye now, returnd
Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth
Triumphant out of this infernal Pit
Abominable, accurst, the house of woe,
And Dungeon of our Tyrant: Now possess,
As Lords, a spacious World, to our native Heaven
Little inferiour, by my adventure hard
With peril great atchiev’d. Long were to tell
What I have don, what sufferd, with what paine
Voyag’d th’ unreal,° vast, unbounded deep
Of horrible confusion, over which
By Sin and Death a broad way now is pav’d
To expedite your glorious march; but I
Toild out my uncouth° passage, forc’t to ride
Th’ untractable Abysse, plung’d in the womb
Of unoriginal° Night and Chaos wilde,
That jealous of thir secrets fiercely oppos’d
My journey strange, with clamorous uproare
Protesting Fate supreame; thence how I found
The new created World, which fame° in Heav’n
Long had foretold, a Fabrick° wonderful
Of absolute perfection, therein Man
Plac’t in a Paradise, by our exile
Made happie: Him by fraud I have seduc’d
From his Creator, and the more to increase
Your wonder, with an Apple; he thereat
Offended, worth your laughter, hath giv’n up
Both his beloved Man and all his World,
To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us,
Without our hazard, labour, or allarme,°
To range in, and to dwell, and over Man
To rule, as over all he should have rul’d.
True is, mee also he hath judg’d, or rather
Mee not, but the brute Serpent in whose shape

265

formless

unfamiliar, strange
without origin

rumor
structure

call to battle

460–1. Satan declares that his followers now hold their titles “in possession” (de facto), by reason of his conquest of earth, not only “of right” (de jure) – a common legal distinction.
480. Protesting both to and against Fate.

266

500

505

510

515

520

525
 
Man I deceav’d: that which to mee belongs,
Is enmity, which he will put between
Mee and Mankinde; I am to bruise his heel;
His Seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head:
A World who would not purchase with a bruise,
Or much more grievous pain? Ye have th’ account
Of my performance: What remains, ye Gods,
But up and enter now into full bliss.
So having said, a while he stood, expecting
Thir universal shout and high applause
To fill his eare, when contrary he hears
On all sides, from innumerable tongues
A dismal° universal hiss, the sound
Of public scorn; he wonderd, but not long
Had leasure, wondring at himself now more;
His Visage drawn he felt to sharp° and spare,°
His Armes clung to his Ribs, his Leggs entwining
Each other, till supplanted° down he fell
A monstrous Serpent on his Belly prone,
Reluctant,° but in vaine, a greater power
Now rul’d him, punisht in the shape he sin’d,
According to his doom:° he would have spoke,
But hiss for hiss returnd with forked tongue
To forked tongue, for now were all transform’d
Alike, to Serpents all as accessories
To his bold Riot:° dreadful was the din
Of hissing through the Hall, thick swarming now
With complicated° monsters head and taile,
Scorpion and Asp, and Amphisbæna dire,
Cerastes hornd, Hydrus, and Ellops drear,
And Dipsas (not so thick swarm’d once the Soil
Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the Isle

dreadful

pointed / thin
overthrown
struggling
judgment

rebellion
tangled

503 bliss. Ironically, the final word of Satan’s triumphal speech rhymes with and prepares for the “hiss” that
will soon greet him (508).
511–47. The scene recalls Dante’s vivid description of the thieves metamorphosed into snakes (Inferno 24 –5).
524–6 Scorpion. This has a venomous sting at the tip of the tail.
Asp. A small Egyptian viper.
Amphisbœna. A mythical snake with a head at either end.
Cerastes. An asp with horny projections
over each eye.
Hydrus, and Ellops. Mythical water snakes.
Dipsas. A mythical snake whose
bite caused raging thirst.
527–8 Gorgon. Medusa. Ovid explains that the blood dropping from her severed head as Persius flew with
it over Libya accounts for the abundance of snakes in that country (Metamorphoses 4.617– 20). Milton’s catalogue of snakes recalls Lucan’s enumeration of the serpents that sprang from Medusa’s blood (Pharsalia
9.697–733).
Ophiusa. Greek, “full of serpents,” the name given to several islands, including Rhodes.

Book 10

530

535

540

545

550

555

560

Ophiusa) but still greatest hee the midst,
Now Dragon grown, larger then whom the Sun
Ingenderd in the Pythian Vale on slime,
Huge Python, and his Power no less he seem’d
Above the rest still to retain; they all
Him follow’d issuing forth to th’ open Field,
Where all yet left of that revolted Rout
Heav’n-fall’n, in station° stood or just array,°
Sublime° with expectation when to see
In Triumph issuing forth thir glorious Chief;
They saw, but other sight instead, a crowd
Of ugly Serpents; horror on them fell,
And horrid sympathie;° for what they saw,
They felt themselvs now changing;° down thir arms,
Down fell both Spear and Shield, down they as fast,
And the dire hiss renew’d, and the dire form
Catcht by Contagion, like in punishment,
As in thir crime. Thus was th’ applause they meant,
Turn’d to exploding° hiss, triumph to shame
Cast on themselves from thir own mouths. There stood
A Grove hard by, sprung up with this thir change,
His will who reigns above, to aggravate
Thir penance,° laden with fair Fruit, like that
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve
Us’d by the Tempter: on that prospect strange
Thir earnest eyes they fix’d, imagining
For one forbidden Tree a multitude
Now ris’n, to work them furder woe or shame;
Yet parcht with scalding thurst and hunger fierce,
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain,
But on they rould in heaps, and up the Trees
Climbing, sat thicker then the snakie locks
That curld Megæra: greedily they pluck’d
The Frutage fair to sight, like that which grew

267

at their posts / on parade
elated, uplifted

corresponding affect
changing into

loudly scornful

punishment

528–32 Dragon. Associated with Satan, cf. Rev. 12:9.
Python. A gigantic serpent engendered from the
slime left by Deucalion’s flood; Apollo slew him and appropriated the “Pythian Vale” and shrine at Delphi
(Metamorphoses 1.438–47), a narrative sometimes read as type of Christ’s victory over the “Dragon” Satan.
559–60 Megœra. One of the three Furies with snaky hair, goddesses of vengeance.
561–70 bituminous Lake. The Dead Sea, where “Sodom,” the evil city destroyed by fire and brimstone (“flamed”)
once stood (Gen. 19:24). Apples reputedly grew nearby, which looked good but dissolved into ashes when
touched. Milton’s scene also evokes the myth of Tantalus, from whom water and fruit receded every time
he reached for them to assuage his raging hunger and thirst (Odyssey 11.582 – 92). Cf. the curse on the serpent, “dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life” (Gen. 3:14).

268

565

570

575

580

585

590
 
Neer that bituminous Lake where Sodom flam’d;
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste
Deceav’d; they fondly° thinking to allay
Thir appetite with gust,° instead of Fruit
Chewd bitter Ashes, which th’ offended taste
With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayd,°
Hunger and thirst constraining, drugd° as oft,
With hatefullest disrelish writh’d thir jaws
With soot and cinders fill’d; so oft they fell
Into the same illusion, not as Man
Whom they triumph’d° once lapst. Thus were they plagu’d
And worn with Famin, long and ceasless hiss,
Till thir lost shape, permitted, they resum’d,
Yearly enjoynd, some say, to undergo
This annual humbling certain number’d days,
To dash thir pride, and joy for Man seduc’t.
However some tradition they dispers’d
Among the Heathen of thir purchase° got,
And Fabl’d how the Serpent, whom they calld
Ophion with Eurynome, the wideEncroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule
Of high Olympus, thence by Saturn driv’n
And Ops, ere yet Dictæan Jove was born.
Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair
Too soon arriv’d, Sin there in power before,
Once actual, now in body, and to dwell
Habitual habitant; behind her Death
Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale Horse: to whom Sin thus began.
Second of Satan sprung, all conquering Death,
What thinkst thou of our Empire now, though earnd

foolishly
relish
attempted
nauseated

triumphed over

acquisition

574–6 lost shape. God permitted them to resume their shape as fallen angels, but turned them to serpents
in an “annual humbling.”
578–84 some tradition. The Titan “Ophion” (whose name means “Serpent”) and his wife “Eurynome” (the
wide-ruling or “wide- / Encroaching”) ruled Olympus until driven away by “Saturn” and his wife “Ops”;
they in turn were overthrown by “Dictæan Jove,” who lived in Crete on Mount Dicte. Milton suggests that
these myths represent versions of the fallen angels’ story transmitted by them to “the Heathen.”
586–8. Sin was “in power” in Eden in the actual sins of Adam and Eve; now Sin will dwell “in body,” as a
“Habitual” physical presence in all creatures, due to original sin.
589–90 pale Horse. Cf. Rev. 6:8, “Behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell
followed with him.” Death is “not mounted yet” because that action is predicted for the Last Days.

Book 10

595

600

605

610

615

620

625

With travail° difficult, not better farr
Then stil at Hels dark threshold to have sate watch,
Unnam’d, undreaded, and thy self half starv’d?
Whom thus the Sin-born Monster answerd soon.
To mee, who with eternal Famin pine,
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven,
There best, where most with ravin° I may meet;
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems
To stuff this Maw, this vast unhide-bound Corps.
To whom th’ incestuous Mother thus repli’d.
Thou therefore on these Herbs, and Fruits, and Flours
Feed first, on each Beast next, and Fish, and Fowle,
No homely° morsels, and whatever thing
The Sithe of Time mowes down, devour unspar’d,
Till I in Man residing through the Race,
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect,
And season him thy last and sweetest prey.
This said, they both betook them several wayes,
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make
All kinds, and for destruction to mature
Sooner or later; which th’ Almightie seeing,
From his transcendent Seat the Saints among,
To those bright Orders utterd thus his voice.
See with what heat these Dogs of Hell advance
To waste and havoc° yonder World, which I
So fair and good created, and had still
Kept in that State, had not the folly of Man
Let in these wastful Furies, who impute
Folly to mee, so doth the Prince of Hell
And his Adherents, that with so much ease
I suffer them to enter and possess
A place so heav’nly, and conniving° seem
To gratifie my scornful Enemies,
That laugh, as if transported with some fit
Of Passion, I to them had quitted° all,
At random yielded up to their misrule;
And know not that I call’d and drew them thither

269
labor, travel

prey

humble, rude

ravage, devastate

tacitly agreeing

handed over

601 unhide-bound Corps. Death’s hunger is such that he can never fill out his skin, so his “hide” does not
cling close to his bones.
606 Sithe of Time. A familiar emblem shows Time (and Death) as a mower with a scythe.
620 wastful Furies. Avenging classical deities (the Eumenides), here, Sin and Death,

270
 
630 My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff° and filth

635

640

645

650

655

660

Which mans polluting Sin with taint hath shed
On what was pure, till cramm’d and gorg’d, nigh burst
With suckt and glutted offal, at one sling
Of thy victorious Arm, well-pleasing Son,
Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave at last
Through Chaos hurld, obstruct the mouth of Hell
For ever, and seal up his ravenous Jawes.
Then Heav’n and Earth renewd shall be made pure
To sanctitie that shall receive no staine:
Till then the Curse pronounc’t on both precedes.°
He ended, and the Heav’nly Audience loud
Sung Halleluia, as the sound of Seas,
Through multitude that sung: Just are thy ways,
Righteous are thy Decrees on all thy Works;
Who can extenuate° thee? Next, to the Son,
Destin’d restorer of Mankind, by whom
New Heav’n and Earth shall to the Ages rise,
Or down from Heav’n descend. Such was thir song,
While the Creator calling forth by name
His mightie Angels gave them several charge,°
As sorted° best with present things. The Sun
Had first his precept° so to move, so shine,
As might affect the Earth with cold and heat
Scarce tollerable, and from the North to call
Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring
Solstitial summers heat. To the blanc° Moone
Her office they prescrib’d, to th’ other five
Thir planetarie motions and aspects°
In Sextile, Square, and Trine, and Opposite,
Of noxious efficacie, and when to joyne
In Synod° unbenigne, and taught the fixt°
Thir influence malignant when to showre,
Which of them rising with the Sun, or falling,

dregs

takes precedence

disparage

different duties
suited
order

white, pale
astrological positions

conjunction / fixed stars

638–9. Cf. Rev. 21:1, “And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were
passed away.”
641–5. Cf. Rev. 19:6, “And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters,
and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia” and Rev. 16:7, “Even so, Lord God Almighty,
true and righteous are thy judgments.”
657 other five. Planets, see note to 5.176–8.
659. The positions of 60, 90, 120, and 180 degrees, respectively.

Book 10

665

670

675

680

685

690

Should prove tempestuous:° To the Winds they set
Thir corners, when with bluster to confound
Sea, Aire, and Shoar, the Thunder when to rowle
With terror through the dark Aereal Hall.
Some say he bid his Angels turne ascanse
The Poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more
From the Suns Axle; they with labour push’d
Oblique the Centric Globe:° Som say the Sun
Was bid turn Reines from th’ Equinoctial Rode
Like distant breadth to Taurus with the Seav’n
Atlantick Sisters, and the Spartan Twins
Up to the Tropic Crab; thence down amaine
By Leo and the Virgin and the Scales,
As deep as Capricorne, to bring in change
Of Seasons to each Clime;° else had the Spring
Perpetual smil’d on Earth with vernant° Flours,
Equal in Days and Nights, except to those
Beyond the Polar Circles; to them Day
Had unbenighted° shon, while the low Sun
To recompence his distance, in thir sight
Had rounded still° th’ Horizon, and not known
Or° East or West, which had forbid the Snow
From cold Estotiland, and South as farr
Beneath Magellan. At that tasted Fruit
The Sun, as from Thyestean Banquet, turn’d
His course intended; else how had the World
Inhabited, though sinless, more then now,
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heate?
These changes in the Heav’ns, though slow, produc’d
Like change on Sea and Land, sideral blast,°

271
productive of storms

the earth

region
flourishing in Spring

without any night
always
either

malign stellar influence

664–5 Winds. Often shown on early maps as blowing from the four “corners” of the earth.
668–80. The poem offers both a Copernican and a Ptolemaic explanation of the shifts made in the cosmos
so as to change the prelapsarian eternal spring, when the sun’s orbit was parallel to the equator,
“Equinoctial Rode.” The Copernican explanation (offered first) proposes that the axis of the earth, “the
Centric Globe,” is now tilted and the “Poles” turned “ascanse” (668 –71). The Ptolemaic explanation is that
the plane of the sun’s orbit is tilted (671–8) so that the sun journeys from Aries through the zodiac. In
spring and summer it passes a like declination (“Like distant breadth”) through “Taurus” and the Pleiades
(“the Seav’n / Atlantick Sisters”), Gemini (“the Spartan Twins”), and Cancer (“the Tropic Crab”). Then at
full speed (“down amaine”) it moves in late summer and autumn through “Leo,” Virgo (“the Virgin”), and
Libra (“the Scales”), to “Capricorne” in winter.
686–7 Estotiland. Northern Labrador.
Magellan. The Straits of Magellan, at the tip of South America.
688 Thyestean. Thyestes seduced the wife of his brother Atreus, who, in revenge, served one of Thyestes’
sons to him in a “Banquet.” The sun changed its course in horror.

272

695

700

705

710

715

720

725
 
Vapour, and Mist, and Exhalation° hot,
Corrupt and Pestilent:° Now from the North
Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shoar
Bursting thir brazen Dungeon, armd with ice
And snow and haile and stormie gust and flaw,°
Boreas and Cæcias and Argestes loud
And Thrascias rend the Woods and Seas upturn;
With adverse blast up-turns them from the South
Notus and Afer black with thundrous Clouds
From Serraliona; thwart of these as fierce
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent Windes
Eurus and Zephir with thir lateral noise,
Sirocco, and Libecchio. Thus began
Outrage from liveless things; but Discord first
Daughter of Sin, among th’ irrational,
Death introduc’d through fierce antipathie:
Beast now with Beast gan war, and Fowle with Fowle,
And Fish with Fish; to graze the Herb all leaving,
Devourd each other; nor stood much in awe
Of Man, but fled him, or with count’nance grim
Glar’d on him passing: these were from without
The growing miseries, which Adam saw
Alreadie in part, though hid in gloomiest shade,
To sorrow abandond, but worse felt within,
And in a troubl’d Sea of passion tost,
Thus to disburd’n sought with sad complaint.
O miserable of happie! is this the end
Of this new glorious World, and mee so late
The Glory of that Glory, who now becom
Accurst of blessed, hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth
Of happiness: yet well, if here would end

meteors produced by vapor
carrying plague

sudden squall

696 Norumbega. Northern New England and maritime Canada.
Samoed. Northeastern Siberia.
698–706 Boreas . . . Cœcias . . . Argestes . . . Thrascias. All winds that blow from the north, northeast, and
northwest, bursting from the cave (“brazen Dungeon”) in which Aeolus had imprisoned the winds. “Notus
and Afer” come from Sierra Leone (“Serraliona”) on the west coast of Africa. Blowing across them
(“thwart”) are the “Levant” from the east and specifically the Levant region, and the “Ponent” (western)
winds “Eurus” (east-southeast), “Zephir” (the west wind), “Sirocco” (southeast) and “Libecchio” (southwest).
707 Discord. The classical Discordia was the sister of Death, hence “Daughter of Sin.”
711 graze the Herb all leaving. Vegetation and fruit were the prelapsarian foods of all creatures; meateating began with the Fall.
720 O miserable of happie. Adam’s “sad complaint” begins with the classical formula for a tragic fall, the
change from happiness to misery. Cf. Satan’s soliloquy on Mount Niphates (4.32–113).

Book 10

730

735

740

745

750

755

760

The miserie, I deserv’d it, and would beare
My own deservings; but this will not serve;
All that I eat or drink, or shall beget,
Is propagated° curse. O voice once heard
Delightfully, Encrease and multiply,
Now death to hear! for what can I encrease
Or multiplie, but curses on my head?
Who of all Ages to succeed, but feeling
The evil on him brought by me, will curse
My Head, Ill fare our Ancestor impure,
For this we may thank Adam; but his thanks
Shall be the execration;° so besides
Mine own that bide upon me, all from mee
Shall with a fierce reflux on mee redound,
On mee as on thir natural center light
Heavie, though in thir place. O fleeting joyes
Of Paradise, deare bought with lasting woes!
Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay
To mould me Man, did I sollicite thee
From darkness to promote me, or here place
In this delicious Garden? as my Will
Concurd not to my being, it were but right
And equal° to reduce me to my dust,
Desirous to resigne, and render back
All I receav’d, unable to performe
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I sought not. To the loss of that,
Sufficient penaltie, why hast thou added
The sense of endless woes? inexplicable
Thy Justice seems; yet to say truth, too late,
I thus contest; then should have been refusd
Those terms whatever, when they were propos’d:
Thou didst accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good,
Then cavil° the conditions? and though God
Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son

273

multiplied

curse

just

object to

738–41 Mine own. Adam’s “own” curse will remain “bide upon” him, and the curses of “all” his descendants will flow back (“redound”) on him as on their “natural center”; objects at that center (“in thir place”)
were thought to be weightless (“light”), but these curses will be “Heavie.”
743–6. Cf. Isa. 45:9: “Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! . . . Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou?”
760–5. Cf. Isa. 45:10: “Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What begettest thou?”

274

765

770

775

780

785

790

795
 
Prove disobedient, and reprov’d, retort,
Wherefore didst thou beget me? I sought it not.
Wouldst thou admit for his contempt of thee
That proud excuse? yet him not thy election,°
But Natural necessity begot.
God made thee of choice his own, and of his own
To serve him, thy reward was of his grace,
Thy punishment then justly is at his Will.
Be it so, for I submit, his doom° is fair,
That dust I am, and shall to dust returne:
O welcom hour whenever! why delayes
His hand to execute what his Decree
Fixd on this day? why do I overlive,
Why am I mockt with death, and length’nd out
To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet
Mortalitie my sentence, and be Earth
Insensible, how glad would lay me down
As in my Mothers lap! There I should rest
And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more
Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worse
To mee and to my ofspring would torment me
With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt
Pursues me still, least all I° cannot die,
Least that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man
Which God inspir’d, cannot together perish
With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave,
Or in some other dismal place who knows
But I shall die a living Death? O thought
Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath
Of Life that sinn’d; what dies but what had life
And sin? the Bodie properly hath neither.
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt, since humane reach° no further knows.
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrauth also? be it,° man is not so,
But mortal doom’d. How can he exercise

choice

judgment

all of me

understanding
even if it is

770 dust. Cf. Gen. 3:19: “dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.”
792. Adam concludes that the soul dies with the body; he has reasoned his way to part of Milton’s Mortalist
heresy (Christian Doctrine 1.13) but not the rest, that both body and soul rise again on the Last Day.
794–808 man is not so. Adam intuits an axiom of Scholastic philosophy, that the action of agents is limited
by the nature of the objects they act upon, so he reasons that “finite” matter cannot suffer “infinite” divine
punishment.

Book 10

800

805

810

815

820

825

830

Wrath without end on Man whom Death must end?
Can he make deathless Death? that were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held, as Argument°
Of weakness, not of Power. Will he draw out,
For angers sake, finite to infinite
In punisht man, to satisfie his rigour
Satisfi’d never; that were to extend
His Sentence beyond dust and Natures Law,
By which all Causes else according still
To the reception of thir matter act,
Not to th’ extent of thir own Spheare. But say
That Death be not one stroak, as I suppos’d,
Bereaving° sense, but endless miserie
From this day onward, which I feel begun
Both in me, and without° me, and so last
To perpetuitie; Ay me, that fear
Comes thundring back with dreadful revolution°
On my defensless head; both Death and I
Am found Eternal, and incorporate° both,
Nor I on my part single, in mee all
Posteritie stands curst: Fair Patrimonie
That I must leave ye, Sons; O were I able
To waste° it all my self, and leave ye none!
So disinherited how would ye bless
Me now your curse! Ah, why should all mankind
For one mans fault thus guiltless be condemn’d,
If guiltless? But from mee what can proceed,
But all corrupt, both Mind and Will deprav’d,
Not to do onely, but to will the same
With me? how can they then acquitted stand
In sight of God? Him after all Disputes
Forc’t° I absolve: all my evasions vain
And reasonings, though through Mazes, lead me still
But to my own conviction: first and last
On mee, mee onely, as the sourse and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due;

275

proof

taking away
outside of
recurrence
making one body

use it up

necessarily

799 Strange contradiction. Adam concludes, with the Scholastics and Milton himself, that God cannot do
things that “imply a contradiction” (Christian Doctrine 1.2).
832–4 On mee, mee onely. Cf. the Son’s offer to accept all humankind’s guilt (3.236 –7) and Eve’s similar
offer (10.935–6).

276

835

840

845

850

855

860

865

870
 
So might the wrauth. Fond° wish! couldst thou support
That burden heavier then the Earth to bear,
Then all the World° much heavier, though divided
With that bad Woman? Thus what thou desir’st,
And what thou fearst, alike destroyes all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
Beyond all past example and future,
To Satan only like both crime and doom.
O Conscience, into what Abyss of fears
And horrors hast thou driv’n me; out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plung’d!
Thus Adam to himself lamented loud
Through the still Night, not now, as ere man fell,
Wholsom and cool, and mild, but with black Air
Accompanied, with damps° and dreadful gloom,
Which to his evil Conscience represented
All things with double terror: On the Ground
Outstretcht he lay, on the cold ground, and oft
Curs’d his Creation, Death as oft accus’d
Of tardie execution, since denounc’t°
The day of his offence. Why comes not Death,
Said hee, with one thrice acceptable stroke
To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word,
Justice Divine not hast’n to be just?
But Death comes not at call, Justice Divine
Mends° not her slowest pace for prayers or cries.
O Woods, O Fountains, Hillocks, Dales and Bowrs,
With other echo late I taught your Shades
To answer, and resound farr other Song.
Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld,
Desolate where she sate, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce passion she assay’d:
But her with stern regard he thus repell’d.
Out of my sight, thou Serpent, that name best
Befits thee with him leagu’d, thy self as false
And hateful; nothing wants,° but that thy shape,
Like his, and colour Serpentine may shew

foolish
universe

noxious vapors

pronounced

quickens

is lacking

860–2. Cf. Adam and Eve’s Morning Hymn (5:153–208, esp. 203 – 4).
867. Adam’s misogynistic outcry begins by reference to the patristic tradition that the name “Eve,” aspirated,
means “serpent.” Raphael (5:388–91) and Adam later (11.159 – 61) refer to the tradition that interprets her
name to mean “life”; cf. 9.1067.

Book 10

875

880

885

890

895

900

905

Thy inward fraud, to warn all Creatures from thee
Henceforth; least that too heav’nly form, pretended°
To hellish falshood, snare them. But for thee
I had persisted happie, had not thy pride
And wandring vanitie, when lest was safe,
Rejected my forewarning, and disdain’d
Not to be trusted, longing to be seen
Though by the Devil himself, him overweening°
To over-reach,° but with the Serpent meeting
Fool’d and beguil’d, by him thou, I by thee,
To trust thee from my side, imagin’d wise,
Constant, mature, proof against all assaults,
And understood not all was but a shew
Rather then solid vertu, all but a Rib
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
More to the part sinister° from me drawn,
Well if thrown out, as supernumerarie
To my just number found. O why did God,
Creator wise, that peopl’d highest Heav’n
With Spirits Masculine, create at last
This noveltie on Earth, this fair defect
Of Nature, and not fill the World at once
With Men as Angels without Feminine,
Or find some other way to generate
Mankind? this mischief had not then befall’n,
And more that shall befall, innumerable
Disturbances on Earth through Femal snares,
And straight° conjunction with this Sex: for either
He never shall find out fit Mate, but such
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake,
Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain
Through her perversness, but shall see her gaind
By a farr worse, or if she love, withheld
By Parents, or his happiest choice too late
Shall meet, alreadie linkt and Wedlock-bound
To a fell° Adversarie, his hate or shame:
Which infinite calamitie shall cause

277

made a disguise

overconfident
outwit

the left side, evil

close, intimate

bitter

884–6 a Rib / Crooked. A commonplace of misogynistic discourses.
887–8 supernumerarie. Some commentators claimed that Adam had thirteen ribs on the left side, so he could
spare one for the creation of Eve and still retain his “just number.”
889–90 Spirits Masculine. Cf. 1.423–5.
891–2 defect / Of Nature. Aristotle (De Generatione) termed the female a defective male.

278

910

915

920

925

930

935

940

945
 
To Humane life, and houshold peace confound.
He added not, and from her turn’d, but Eve
Not so repulst, with Tears that ceas’d not flowing,
And tresses all disorderd, at his feet
Fell humble, and imbracing them, besaught
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.
Forsake me not thus, Adam, witness Heav’n
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart
I beare thee, and unweeting° have offended,
Unhappilie deceav’d; thy suppliant
I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave° me not,
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counsel in this uttermost distress,
My onely strength and stay: forlorn of thee,
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?
While yet we live, scarse one short hour perhaps,
Between us two let there be peace, both joyning,
As joyn’d in injuries, one enmitie
Against a Foe by doom° express assign’d us,
That cruel Serpent: On me exercise not
Thy hatred for this miserie befall’n,
On me alreadie lost, mee then thy self
More miserable; both have sin’d, but thou
Against God onely, I against God and thee,
And to the place of judgment will return,
There with my cries importune Heaven, that all
The sentence from thy head remov’d may light
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe,
Mee mee onely just object of his ire.
She ended weeping, and her lowlie plight,°
Immovable till peace obtain’d from fault
Acknowledg’d and deplor’d, in Adam wraught
Commiseration; soon his heart relented
Towards her, his life so late and sole delight,
Now at his feet submissive in distress,
Creature so faire his reconcilement seeking,
His counsel whom she had displeas’d, his aide;
As one disarm’d, his anger all he lost,
And thus with peaceful words uprais’d her soon.

unknowing
deprive

judgment

posture

917–18. Eve assumes the posture of a classical suppliant, clasping Adam’s knees as she begs for reconciliation.
936–7 Mee mee only. Cf. Adam’s cry at 832–4 above and the Son’s offer (3.236 – 7).

Book 10

950

955

960

965

970

975

980

985

Unwarie, and too desirous, as before,
So now of what thou knowst not, who desir’st
The punishment all on thy self; alas,
Beare thine own first, ill able to sustaine
His full wrauth whose thou feelst as yet lest part,
And my displeasure bearst so ill. If Prayers
Could alter high Decrees, I to that place
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
That on my head all might be visited,
Thy frailtie and infirmer Sex forgiv’n,
To me committed and by me expos’d.
But rise, let us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blam’d enough elsewhere, but strive
In offices° of Love, how we may light’n
Each others burden in our share of woe;
Since this days Death denounc’t, if ought I see,
Will prove no sudden, but a slow-pac’t evill,
A long days dying to augment our paine,
And to our Seed (O hapless Seed!) deriv’d.°
To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, repli’d.
Adam, by sad experiment° I know
How little weight my words with thee can finde,
Found so erroneous, thence by just event°
Found so unfortunate; nevertheless,
Restor’d by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regaine
Thy Love, the sole contentment of my heart
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet brest are ris’n,
Tending to some relief of our extremes,°
Or end, though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,
As in° our evils, and of easier choice.
If care of our descent° perplex° us most,
Which must be born to certain woe, devourd
By Death at last, and miserable it is
To be to others cause of misery,
Our own begotten, and of our Loines to bring
Into this cursed World a woful Race,
That after wretched Life must be at last
Food for so foule a Monster, in thy power

953 that place. The place of judgment.

279

duties

passed down
experience
outcome

extremities, hardships
considering
descendants / torment

280

990

995

1000

1005

1010

1015

1020

1025
 
It lies, yet ere Conception to prevent°
The Race unblest, to being yet unbegot.
Childless thou art, Childless remaine:
So Death shall be deceav’d° his glut, and with us two
Be forc’d to satisfie his Rav’nous Maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain
From Loves due Rites, Nuptial imbraces sweet,
And with desire to languish without hope,
Before the present object languishing
With like desire, which would be miserie
And torment less then none of what we dread,
Then both our selves and Seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make short,°
Let us seek Death, or he not found, supply
With our own hands his Office on our selves;
Why stand we longer shivering under feares,
That shew no end but Death, and have the power,
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing,
Destruction with destruction to destroy.
She ended heer, or vehement° despaire
Broke off the rest; so much of Death her thoughts
Had entertaind, as di’d her Cheeks with pale.
But Adam with such counsel nothing° sway’d,
To better hopes his more attentive minde
Labouring had rais’d, and thus to Eve repli’d.
Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
To argue in thee somthing more sublime
And excellent then what thy minde contemnes;
But self-destruction therefore saught, refutes
That excellence thought in thee, and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
For loss of life and pleasure overlov’d.
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
Of miserie, so thinking to evade
The penaltie pronounc’t, doubt not but God
Hath wiselier arm’d his vengeful ire then so
To be forestall’d; much more I fear least Death
So snatcht will not exempt us from the paine

996 present object. Eve herself, who then imagines her own frustrated desire.
1015 What thy minde contemnes. Life, which your mind seems to despise.

forestall

cheated of

lose no time

passionate

not at all

Book 10

1030

1035

1040

1045

1050

1055

1060

We are by doom° to pay; rather such acts
Of contumacie° will provoke the highest
To make death in us live: Then let us seek
Some safer resolution, which methinks
I have in view, calling to minde with heed
Part of our Sentence, that thy Seed shall bruise
The Serpents head; piteous amends,° unless
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand Foe
Satan, who in the Serpent hath contriv’d
Against us this deceit: to crush his head
Would be revenge indeed; which will be lost
By death brought on our selves, or childless days
Resolv’d, as thou proposest; so our Foe
Shall scape his punishment ordain’d, and wee
Instead shall double ours upon our heads.
No more be mention’d then of violence
Against our selves, and wilful barrenness,
That cuts us off from hope, and savours onely
Rancor and pride, impatience and despite,
Reluctance° against God and his just yoke
Laid on our Necks. Remember with what mild
And gracious temper he both heard and judg’d
Without wrauth or reviling; wee expected
Immediate dissolution, which we thought
Was meant by Death that day, when lo, to thee
Pains onely in Child-bearing were foretold,
And bringing forth, soon recompenc’t with joy,
Fruit of thy Womb: On mee the Curse aslope
Glanc’d on the ground, with labour I must earne
My bread; what harm? Idleness had bin worse;
My labour will sustain me; and least Cold
Or Heat should injure us, his timely care
Hath unbesaught provided, and his hands
Cloath’d us unworthie, pitying while he judg’d;
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear
Be open, and his heart to pitie incline,
And teach us further by what means to shun
Th’ inclement Seasons, Rain, Ice, Hail and Snow,

281
judgment
willful disobedience

small consolation

struggling, resistance

1052–4. Adam echoes Elizabeth’s address to Mary, mother of Jesus, “Blessed is the fruit of thy womb” (Luke
1:42), alluding unaware to the promise about the “Seed” of the woman.
aslope. Like a spear that
“Glanc’d” aside from its target and hit the ground.

282

1065

1070

1075

1080

1085

1090

1095

1100
 
Which now the Skie with various Face begins
To shew us in this Mountain, while the Winds
Blow moist and keen, shattering° the graceful locks°
Of these fair spreading Trees; which bids us seek
Som better shroud,° som better warmth to cherish°
Our Limbs benumm’d, ere this diurnal Starr°
Leave cold the Night, how we his gather’d beams
Reflected, may with matter sere° foment,°
Or by collision of two bodies grinde
The Air attrite° to Fire, as late the Clouds
Justling or pusht with Winds rude in thir shock
Tine the slant Lightning, whose thwart flame driv’n down
Kindles the gummie bark of Firr or Pine,
And sends a comfortable heat from farr,
Which might supplie° the Sun: such Fire to use,
And what may else be remedie or cure
To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought,
Hee will instruct us praying, and of Grace
Beseeching him, so as we need not fear
To pass commodiously this life, sustain’d
By him with many comforts, till we end
In dust, our final rest and native home.
What better can we do, then to the place
Repairing where he judg’d us, prostrate fall
Before him reverent, and there confess
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears
Watering the ground, and with our sighs the Air
Frequenting,° sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeign’d, and humiliation meek.
Undoubtedly he will relent and turn
From his displeasure; in whose look serene,
When angry most he seem’d and most severe,
What else but favor, grace, and mercie shon?
So spake our Father penitent, nor Eve
Felt less remorse: they forthwith to the place
Repairing where he judg’d them prostrate fell
Before him reverent, and both confess’d

scattering / leaves
shelter / keep warm
the sun
dry / excite
sparked by friction

add to

filling

1075–8. Cf. Lucretius, De Rerum Natura 5.1091–5, for the theory that fire was discovered from lightning striking the forests.
Tine. Ignite.
thwart. Slanting.
1098–1104. The final six and a half lines repeat almost word for word lines 1086 – 92, only with changed verb
tenses, as Adam’s proposed gesture of repentance is seen to be carried out in every detail.

Book 10
Humbly thir faults, and pardon beg’d, with tears
Watering the ground, and with thir sighs the Air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeign’d, and humiliation meek.
The End of the Tenth Book.

283

Figure 8

Illustration to Book 11, 1688 ( John Baptista Medina)

BOOK 11
THE ARGUMENT
The Son of God presents to his Father the Prayers of our first Parents now repenting, and intercedes for them: God accepts them, but declares that they must no longer
abide in Paradise; sends Michael with a Band of Cherubim to dispossess them; but
first to reveal to Adam future things: Michaels coming down. Adam shews to Eve certain ominous signs; he discerns Michaels approach, goes out to meet him: the Angel
denounces thir departure. Eve’s Lamentation. Adam pleads, but submits: The Angel
leads him up to a high Hill, sets before him in vision what shall happ’n till the Flood.

Thus they in lowliest plight repentant stood
Praying, for from the Mercie-seat above
Prevenient Grace descending had remov’d
The stonie from thir hearts, & made new flesh
5 Regenerate grow instead, that sighs now breath’d
Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer
Inspir’d, and wing’d for Heav’n with speedier flight
Then loudest Oratorie:° yet thir port°
Not of mean suiters, nor important less
10 Seem’d thir Petition, then when th’ ancient Pair
In Fables old, less ancient yet then these,
Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha to restore
The Race of Mankind drownd, before the Shrine
Of Themis stood devout. To Heav’n thir prayers
15 Flew up, nor missd the way, by envious windes
Blow’n vagabond° or frustrate:° in they passd
Dimentionless° through Heav’nly dores; then clad

prayers / bearing

scattered / thwarted
without physical extension

6 denounces. Proclaims.
1 stood. May mean “remained,” or that, after prostrating themselves (10.1099) they prayed standing upright;
their “port” was “Not of mean suiters” (8–9). Cf. 4.720–2.
3–5 Prevenient Grace. Grace preceding human choice, enabling the will (in bondage as a result of sin) to
repent. Cf. Ezek. 11:19, “I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will given them an heart of
flesh” – a proof-text for regeneration.
5–7 Unutterable. Cf. Rom. 8:26: “we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself
maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.”
10–14 ancient Pair. In a Greek myth analogous to the Noah story, “Deucalion” and his wife “Pyrrha” alone
survive a universal flood by building an ark. They then pray to “Themis,” goddess of justice, who tells
them to restore humankind by throwing stones behind them, which turn into men and women
(Metamorphoses 1.318–415).

286

20

25

30

35

40

45
 
With incense, where the Golden Altar fum’d,
By thir great Intercessor, came in sight
Before the Fathers Throne: Them the glad° Son
Presenting, thus to intercede began.
See Father, what first fruits on Earth are sprung
From thy implanted Grace in Man, these Sighs
And Prayers, which in this Golden Censer,° mixt
With Incense, I thy Priest before thee bring,
Fruits of more pleasing savour from thy seed
Sow’n with contrition in his heart, then those
Which his own hand manuring° all the Trees
Of Paradise could have produc’t, ere fall’n
From innocence. Now therefore bend thine eare
To supplication, heare his sighs though mute;
Unskilful with what words to pray, let mee
Interpret for him, mee his Advocate
And propitiation, all his works on mee
Good or not good ingraft, my Merit those
Shall perfet, and for these my Death shall pay.
Accept me, and in mee from these receave
The smell of peace toward Mankinde, let him live
Before thee reconcil’d, at least his days
Numberd, though sad, till Death, his doom (which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse)
To better life shall yeeld him, where with mee
All my redeemd may dwell in joy and bliss,
Made one with me as I with thee am one.
To whom the Father, without Cloud, serene.
All thy request for Man, accepted Son,
Obtain, all thy request was my Decree:
But longer in that Paradise to dwell,

pleased

incense-burner

cultivating

18 incense. Cf. Rev. 8:3, “another angel came . . . having a golden censer; and there was given unto him
much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which was before
the throne.”
25 Priest. In Christian Doctrine 1.15, Milton defines Christ’s priestly function as that whereby he “once offered
himself to God the Father as a sacrifice for sinners, and has always made, and still continues to make intercession for us.”
33–4 Advocate / And propitiation. Cf. 1 John 2:1–2: “We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous: And he is the propitiation for our sins.”
34–6 ingraft. The theological term for the Son taking to himself all the “works” of humans, perfecting their
good deeds by his “Merit” and by his “Death” paying the debt due God’s justice for their evil deeds.
42–4 Made one. Cf. John 17:22–3: “that they may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one.”

Book 11

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

The Law I gave to Nature him forbids:
Those pure immortal Elements that know
No gross, no unharmoneous mixture foule,
Eject him tainted now, and purge him off
As a distemper, gross to aire as gross,
And mortal food, as may dispose him best
For dissolution wrought by Sin, that first
Distemperd° all things, and of incorrupt
Corrupted. I at first with two fair gifts
Created him endowd, with Happiness
And Immortalitie: that fondly° lost,
This other serv’d but to eternize woe;
Till I provided Death; so Death becomes
His final remedie, and after Life
Tri’d in sharp tribulation, and refin’d
By Faith and faithful works, to second Life,
Wak’t in the renovation of the just,
Resignes him up with Heav’n and Earth renewd.
But let us call to Synod° all the Blest
Through Heav’ns wide bounds; from them I will not hide
My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed,
As how with peccant° Angels late they saw;
And in thir state, though firm, stood more confirmd.
He ended, and the Son gave signal high
To the bright Minister that watchd, hee blew
His Trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps
When God descended, and perhaps once more
To sound at general Doom. Th’ Angelic blast
Filld all the Regions: from thir blissful Bowrs
Of Amarantin Shade,° Fountain or Spring,
By the waters of Life, where ere they sate
In fellowships of joy: the Sons of Light
Hasted, resorting° to the Summons high,
And took thir Seats; till from his Throne supream

287

destroyed harmony in

foolishly

assembly

sinning

unfading trees

gathering

50–5 pure immortal Elements. These themselves “purge” man as a “distemper” (“unharmoneous” disorder), and “Eject” him from Eden to a place where the air and food are more “gross,” like himself,
disposing him for death, the “dissolution wrought by Sin.”
64 Faith and faithful works. Cf. Christian Doctrine 1.22: “we are justified by faith without the works of the
law, but not without the works of faith” – a qualification of the reformed doctrine of Sola Fides.
65 renovation. The resurrection and renewal of body and soul at the Last Day.
74–6. A trumpet sounded on Mount “Oreb” when God delivered the Ten Commandments to Moses (Exod.
19:19); it will sound again at the Last Judgment (“general Doom”).

288

85

90

95

100

105

110

115
 
Th’ Almighty thus pronouncd his sovran Will.
O Sons, like one of us Man is become
To know both Good and Evil, since his taste
Of that defended° Fruit; but let him boast
His knowledge of Good lost, and Evil got,
Happier, had suffic’d him to have known
Good by it self, and Evil not at all.
He sorrows now, repents, and prayes contrite,
My motions° in him, longer then they move,
His heart I know, how variable and vain
Self-left. Least therefore his now bolder hand
Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat,
And live for ever, dream at least to live
For ever, to remove him I decree,
And send him from the Garden forth to Till
The Ground whence he was taken, fitter soile.
Michael, this my behest have thou in charge,
Take to thee from among the Cherubim
Thy choice of flaming Warriours, least the Fiend
Or° in behalf of Man, or to invade
Vacant possession° som new trouble raise:
Hast thee, and from the Paradise of God
Without remorse drive out the sinful Pair,
From hallowd ground th’ unholie, and denounce°
To them and to thir Progenie from thence
Perpetual banishment. Yet least they faint°
At the sad Sentence rigorously urg’d,
For I behold them softn’d and with tears
Bewailing thir excess,° all terror hide.
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveale
To Adam what shall come in future dayes,
As I shall thee enlighten, intermix
My Cov’nant in the womans seed renewd;
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace:

forbidden

impulses

either
abandoned property

announce
become depressed, swoon

violation of law

83–98. Several phrases in God’s speech are closely quoted from Gen. 3:22–3: “And the Lord God said, Behold,
the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take
also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden
of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken.” Milton adds the phrase, “dream at least to live /
For ever” (95–6) to signal that some of God’s statements (84 –5, 94 –5) are ironic.
115 As I shall thee enlighten. God, it seems, reveals the “future” events to Michael at the same time as
Michael presents them to Adam (see 12:128).

Book 11

120

125

130

135

140

145

150

And on the East side of the Garden place,
Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbes,
Cherubic watch,° and of a Sword the flame
Wide waving, all approach farr off to fright,
And guard all passage to the Tree of Life:
Least Paradise a receptacle prove
To Spirits foule, and all my Trees thir prey,
With whose stol’n Fruit Man once more to delude.
He ceas’d; and th’ Archangelic Power prepar’d
For swift descent, with him the Cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim; four faces each
Had, like a double Janus, all thir shape
Spangl’d with eyes more numerous then those
Of Argus, and more wakeful then to drouze,
Charm’d with Arcadian Pipe, the Pastoral Reed
Of Hermes, or his opiate Rod. Mean while
To resalute the World with sacred Light
Leucothea wak’d, and with fresh dews imbalmd
The Earth, when Adam and first Matron Eve
Had ended now thir Orisons, and found,
Strength added from above, new hope to spring
Out of despaire, joy, but with fear yet linkt;
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewd.°
Eve, easily may Faith admit, that all
The good which we enjoy, from Heav’n descends;
But that from us ought° should ascend to Heav’n
So prevalent° as to concerne the mind
Of God high-blest, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may seem; yet this will Prayer,
Or one short sigh of humane breath, up-borne
Ev’n to the Seat of God. For since I saught
By Prayer th’ offended Deitie to appease,
Kneel’d and before him humbl’d all my heart,
Methought I saw him placable° and mild,

289

sentinels

resumed

anything
influential, potent

forgiving

118–22. Cf. Gen. 3:24: “So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims,
and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.”
128–9 Cherubim; four faces each. Cf. Ezek. 1:10 and PL 6.753– 6.
Janus. The Roman god of doorways had two faces – in one version, four, corresponding to the four seasons and the four quarters of
the earth.
129–33 Argus. Argus, with one hundred eyes, was set by Juno to watch Jove’s mistress Io, but “Hermes” (Mercury)
put all of his eyes to sleep with his music (“Arcadian Pipe”) and his sleep-inducing caduceus (“opiate Rod”).
135 Leucothea. Roman goddess of the dawn.

290

155

160

165

170

175

180

185
 
Bending his eare; perswasion in me grew
That I was heard with favour; peace returnd
Home to my Brest, and to my memorie
His promise, that thy Seed shall bruise our Foe;
Which then not minded° in dismay, yet now
Assures me that the bitterness of death
Is past, and we shall live. Whence Haile to thee,
Eve rightly call’d, Mother of all Mankind,
Mother of all things living, since by thee
Man is to live, and all things live for Man.
To whom thus Eve with sad° demeanour meek.
Ill worthie I such title should belong
To me transgressour, who for thee ordaind
A help, became thy snare; to mee reproach
Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise:
But infinite in pardon was my Judge,
That I who first brought Death on all, am grac’t
The sourse of life; next favourable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me voutsaf ’st,
Farr other name deserving. But the Field
To labour calls us now with sweat impos’d,
Though after sleepless Night; for see the Morn,
All unconcern’d with our unrest, begins
Her rosie progress smiling; let us forth,
I never from thy side henceforth to stray,
Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoind
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell,
What can be toilsom in these pleasant Walkes?
Here let us live, though in fall’n state, content.
So spake, so wish’d much-humbl’d Eve, but Fate
Subscrib’d not; Nature first gave Signs, imprest
On Bird, Beast, Aire, Aire suddenly eclips’d°
After short blush of Morn; nigh in her sight
The Bird of Jove, stoopt from his aerie tour,
Two Birds of gayest plume before him drove:
Down from a Hill the Beast that reigns in Woods,°
First hunter then, pursu’d a gentle brace,°

attended to

serious, grave

darkened

the lion
pair

155 promise. Cf. 10.179–81
158–60. Cf. Raphael’s salutation at 5.385–91. The name “Eve” is cognate with the Hebrew word meaning life.
172 sweat impos’d. Part of the punishment for the Fall, “In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread” (Gen.
3:19). Cf. PL 10.205.
185–6 Bird of Jove. The eagle swooped (“stoopt”) from his towering flight (“aerie tour”).

Book 11

190

195

200

205

210

215

220

Goodliest of all the Forrest, Hart and Hinde;
Direct to th’ Eastern Gate was bent thir flight.
Adam observ’d, and with his Eye the chase
Pursuing, not unmov’d to Eve thus spake.
O Eve, some furder change awaits us nigh,
Which Heav’n by these mute signs in Nature shews
Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn
Us haply° too secure° of our discharge
From penaltie, because from death releast
Some days; how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows, or more then this, that we are dust,
And thither must return and be no more.
Why else this double object in our sight
Of flight pursu’d in th’ Air and ore the ground
One way the self-same hour? why in the East
Darkness ere Dayes mid-course, and Morning light
More orient° in yon Western Cloud that draws
O’re the blew Firmament a radiant white,
And slow descends, with somthing heav’nly fraught.°
He err’d not, for by this° the heav’nly Bands
Down from a Skie of Jasper lighted° now
In Paradise, and on a Hill made alt,°
A glorious Apparition, had not doubt
And carnal° fear that day dimm’d Adams eye.
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met
Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw
The field Pavilion’d with his Guardians bright;
Nor that which on the flaming Mount appeerd
In Dothan, cover’d with a Camp of Fire,
Against the Syrian King, who to surprize
One man, Assassin-like had levied Warr,
Warr unproclam’d. The Princely Hierarch
In thir bright stand,° there left his Powers° to seise
Possession of the Garden; hee alone,
To find where Adam shelterd, took his way,

291

perhaps / overconfident

bright
stored
by this time
alighted, shone
came to a halt
bodily

formation / army

194–5 mute signs. Both scenes portray a regal creature (eagle, lion) driving forth a superlatively lovely pair.
Without making a specific interpretation Adam infers that they may be “Forerunners” of God’s purpose.
214–15 Mahanaim. “Jacob” gave this name, meaning “armies” or “camps” (“field Pavilion’d”) to a place where
he saw an army of angels (Gen. 32:1–2).
216–20 flaming Mount. The “Syrian King” had “levied Warr” against “Dothan” in an effort to capture Elisha
the prophet (“One man”), but God surrounded him on a mountain with horses and chariots of fire (2 Kgs
6:17).

292

225

230

235

240

245

250

255

260
 
Not unperceav’d of Adam, who to Eve,
While the great Visitant approachd, thus spake.
Eve, now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will soon determin,° or impose
New Laws to be observ’d; for I descrie
From yonder blazing Cloud that veils the Hill
One of the heav’nly Host, and by his Gate
None of the meanest, some great Potentate
Or of the Thrones above, such Majestie
Invests him coming; yet not terrible,
That I should fear, nor sociably mild,
As Raphael, that I should much confide,
But solemn and sublime, whom not to offend,
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
He ended; and th’ Arch-Angel soon drew nigh,
Not in his shape Celestial, but as Man
Clad to meet Man; over his lucid° Armes
A militarie Vest of purple flowd
Livelier then Melibœan, or the graine
Of Sarra, worn by Kings and Hero’s old
In time of Truce; Iris had dipt the wooff;
His starrie Helme unbuckl’d shew’d him prime
In Manhood where Youth ended; by his side
As in a glistering Zodiac° hung the Sword,
Satans dire dread, and in his hand the Spear.
Adam bowd low, hee Kingly from his State°
Inclin’d not, but his coming thus declar’d.
Adam, Heav’ns high behest no Preface needs:
Sufficient that thy Prayers are heard, and Death,
Then due by sentence when thou didst transgress,
Defeated° of his seisure° many dayes
Giv’n thee of Grace, wherein thou may’st repent,
And one bad act with many deeds well done
Mayst cover: well may then thy Lord appeas’d
Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claime;
But longer in this Paradise to dwell
Permits not; to remove thee I am come,

make an end

bright

belt of constellations
regal bearing

cheated / possession

240. Cf. Raphael’s appearance at 5.277–85.
242–4 Melibœan. Both Meliboea in Thessaly and “Sarra” (Tyre) were famous for purple dye (“grain”). “Iris”
as goddess of the rainbow (also the sign of God’s “Truce”) dyed the “wooff ” (threads woven across a
warp).

Book 11

265

270

275

280

285

290

295

And send thee from the Garden forth to till
The ground whence thou wast tak’n, fitter Soile.
He added not, for Adam at the newes
Heart-strook with chilling gripe° of sorrow stood,
That all his senses bound;° Eve, who unseen
Yet all had heard, with audible lament
Discover’d° soon the place of her retire.°
O unexpected stroke, worse then of Death!
Must I thus leave thee Paradise? thus leave
Thee Native Soile, these happie Walks and Shades,
Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend,
Quiet though sad, the respit° of that day
That must be mortal to us both. O flours,
That never will in other Climate grow,
My early visitation, and my last
At Eev’n, which I bred up with tender hand
From the first op’ning bud, and gave ye Names,
Who now shall reare ye to the Sun, or ranke
Your Tribes,° and water from th’ ambrosial Fount?
Thee lastly nuptial Bowre, by mee adornd
With what to sight or smell was sweet; from thee
How shall I part, and whither wander down
Into a lower World, to° this obscure
And wilde, how shall we breath in other Aire
Less pure, accustomd to immortal Fruits?
Whom thus the Angel interrupted milde.
Lament not Eve, but patiently resigne
What justly thou hast lost; nor set thy heart,
Thus over-fond, on that which is not thine;
Thy going is not lonely, with thee goes
Thy Husband, him to follow thou art bound;
Where he abides, think there thy native soile.
Adam by this° from the cold sudden damp°
Recovering, and his scatterd spirits returnd,
To Michael thus his humble words addressd.
Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or nam’d
Of them the Highest, for such of shape may seem

293

spasm
seized up
revealed / retreat

delay

species

compared to

by this time / stupor

269–70 Native Soile. Unlike Adam, Eve was created in the “Paradise” of Eden.
277. Milton departs from Gen. 2:19–20, in which Adam alone gives names. The action of naming the flowers
(like Adam’s naming of the beasts, 8.352–5) signifies intuitive knowledge of their nature.
279 ambrosial Fount. See 4.237–40, describing the fount in Eden that “Ran Nectar.”

294

300

305

310

315

320

325

330

335
 
Prince above Princes, gently hast thou tould
Thy message, which might else in telling wound,
And in performing end us; what besides
Of sorrow and dejection and despair
Our frailtie can sustain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place, our sweet
Recess,° and onely consolation left
Familiar to our eyes, all places else
Inhospitable appeer and desolate,
Nor knowing us nor known: and if by prayer
Incessant I could hope to change the will
Of him who all things can,° I would not cease
To wearie him with my assiduous cries:
But prayer against his absolute Decree
No more availes then breath against the winde,
Blown stifling back on him that breaths it forth:
Therefore to his great bidding I submit.
This most afflicts me, that departing hence,
As from his face I shall be hid, deprivd
His blessed count’nance; here I could frequent,
With worship, place by place where he voutsaf ’d
Presence Divine, and to my Sons relate;
On this Mount he appeerd, under this Tree
Stood visible, among these Pines his voice
I heard, here with him at this Fountain talk’d:
So many grateful° Altars I would reare
Of grassie Terfe, and pile up every Stone
Of lustre from the brook, in memorie,
Or monument to Ages, and thereon
Offer sweet smelling Gumms and Fruits and Flours:
In yonder nether World where shall I seek
His bright appearances, or footstep trace?
For though I fled him angrie, yet recall’d
To life prolongd and promisd Race,° I now
Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts°
Of glory, and farr off his steps adore.
To whom thus Michael with regard benigne.
Adam, thou know’st Heav’n his, and all the Earth,
Not this Rock onely; his Omnipresence fills


refuge

knows, can do

showing gratitude

descendants
distant signs

316. Cf. Gen. 4:14, Cain’s response to his punishment: “from thy face shall I be hid.”
323–6. The patriarchs raised “Altars” wherever God appeared to them.

Book 11

340

345

350

355

360

365

370

Land, Sea, and Aire, and every kinde that lives,
Fomented° by his virtual° power and warmd:
All th’ Earth he gave thee to possess and rule,
No despicable gift; surmise not then
His presence to these narrow bounds confin’d
Of Paradise or Eden: this had been
Perhaps thy Capital Seate, from whence had spred
All generations, and had hither come
From all the ends of th’ Earth, to celebrate
And reverence thee thir great Progenitor.
But this præeminence thou hast lost, brought down
To dwell on eeven ground now with thy Sons:
Yet doubt not but in Vallie and in plaine
God is as here, and will be found alike
Present, and of his presence many a signe
Still following thee, still compassing° thee round
With goodness and paternal Love, his Face
Express, and of his steps the track Divine.
Which that thou mayst beleeve, and be confirmd
Ere thou from hence depart, know I am sent
To shew thee what shall come in future dayes
To thee and to thy Ofspring; good with bad
Expect to hear, supernal° Grace contending
With sinfulness of Men; thereby to learn
True patience, and to temper joy with fear
And pious sorrow, equally enur’d°
By moderation either state to beare,
Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead
Safest thy life, and best prepar’d endure
Thy mortal passage when it comes. Ascend
This Hill; let Eve (for I have drencht her eyes)
Here sleep below while thou to foresight wak’st,
As once thou slepst, while Shee to life was formd.
To whom thus Adam gratefully repli’d.
Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide, the path
Thou lead’st me, and to the hand of Heav’n submit,
However chast’ning, to the evil turne
My obvious° breast, arming to overcom

295

nurtured / exerting influence

surrounding

heavenly

tempered

exposed, vulnerable

357–8 future dayes. Prophetic visions are a common feature of epic, e.g., Aeneas’ vision of his descendants
culminating in the Roman empire (Aeneid 6.754–854).
367 drencht. Placed in her eyes a soporific liquid (drench).

296
 
375 By suffering, and earne rest from labour won,

380

385

390

395

If so I may attain. So both ascend
In the Visions of God: It was a Hill
Of Paradise the highest, from whose top
The Hemisphere of Earth in cleerest Ken
Stretcht out to the amplest reach of prospect lay.
Not higher that Hill nor wider looking round,
Whereon for different cause the Tempter set
Our second Adam in the Wilderness,
To shew him all Earths Kingdomes and thir Glory.
His Eye might there command wherever stood
City of old or modern Fame, the Seat
Of mightiest Empire, from the destind Walls
Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can
And Samarchand by Oxus, Temirs Throne,
To Paquin of Sinæan Kings, and thence
To Agra and Lahor of great Mogul
Down to the golden Chersonese, or where
The Persian in Ecbatan sate, or since
In Hispahan, or where the Russian Ksar
In Mosco, or the Sultan in Bizance,
Turchestan-born; nor could his eye not ken°
Th’ Empire of Negus to his utmost Port
Ercoco and the less Maritim Kings
Mombaza, and Quiloa, and Melind,

see

381–4. When Satan tempted Christ (the subject of Milton’s brief epic, Paradise Regained) he took him to “an
exceeding high mountain” and showed him “all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them” (Matt.
4:8). Cf. Paradise Regained 3.251–4.169.
383–92. Christ, the “second Adam” (but not Adam, who is shown “nobler sights,” 411), will first view “destined” (yet to come) kingdoms in Asia: “Cambalu,” capital of Cathay (north China), ruled by such Khans
as Ghenghis and Kublei, “Cathaian Can”; “Temir” (Tamburlaine), ruled “Samarchand” (Samarkand), near
the “Oxus” river in modern Uzbekistan; “Paquin” (Peking, Beijing), of “Sinæan Kings” (Chinese); “Agra and
Lahor” (Lahore), “Mogul” capitals in northern India and Pakistan; “golden Chersonese,” the Malay peninsula
east of India, fabled for wealth.
393–6. Then Christ will see “Persian,” Russian, and Turkish kingdoms. In Persia (Iran), he will see “Ecbatan”
(Hamadan), a summer residence of Persian kings, and “Hispahan” (Isfahan), which became the Persian
capital in the sixteenth century. “Bizance” (Byzantium, Constantinople, Istanbul) was capital of the
Ottoman empire and ruled by “Sultans” after falling to the Turks in 1453.
397–401. In Africa he will see Abyssinia (northern Ethiopia), empire of the “Negus” (ruler) reaching to “Ercoco”
(Arkiko), a Red Sea port. Then “Mombaza” (Mombasa) and “Melind” (Malindi) in Kenya and “Quiloa” (Kilwa),
an island port off the coast of Tanzania; “Sofala,” a port in Mozambique, sometimes identified with the
biblical “Ophir,” from which Solomon took gold for his temple (1 Kgs 9:28); and “Congo” and “Angola” on
the west coast.

Book 11

297

400 And Sofala thought Ophir, to the Realme

405

410

415

420

425

Of Congo, and Angola fardest South;
Or thence from Niger Flood to Atlas Mount
The Kingdoms of Almansor, Fez and Sus,
Marocco and Algiers, and Tremisen;
On Europe thence, and where Rome was to sway
The World: in Spirit perhaps he also saw
Rich Mexico the seat of Motezume,
And Cusco in Peru, the richer seat
Of Atabalipa, and yet unspoil’d
Guiana, whose great Citie Geryons Sons
Call El Dorado: but to nobler sights
Michael from Adams eyes the Filme remov’d
Which that false Fruit that promis’d clearer sight
Had bred; then purg’d with Euphrasie and Rue
The visual Nerve, for he had much to see;
And from the Well of Life three drops instill’d.
So deep the power of these Ingredients pierc’d,
Eevn to the inmost seat of mental sight,
That Adam now enforc’t to close his eyes,
Sunk down and all his Spirits became intranst:°
But him the gentle Angel by the hand
Soon rais’d, and his attention thus recall’d.
Adam, now ope thine eyes, and first behold
Th’ effects which thy original crime hath wrought
In some to spring from thee, who never touch’d
Th’ excepted° Tree, nor with the Snake conspir’d,
Nor sinn’d thy sin, yet from that sin derive
Corruption to bring forth more violent deeds.

in a trance

forbidden

402–4. In North Africa, looking from the “Niger” river in west Africa flowing eastward to the Atlantic to the
“Atlas” mountains in Morocco (or possibly to Mout Atlas in Mauritania), he sees the kingdom of various
Muslim rulers called Al Mansur (“Almansor”), probably referring to Abu’Amir al Ma-Ma’afiri, Caliph of Cordova.
That empire takes in “Fez,” capital of Morocco, Tunis (“Sus”), “Algiers, “ and “Tremisen” (Tlemeen), part
of Algeria.
406–11. Christ will see places in the New World only “in Spirit,” probably because they lie on the other side
of the spherical earth: “Mexico” the seat of Montezuma (“Motezume”), the last Aztec emperor; “Cusco in
Peru” seat of Atahualpa (“Atabalipa”), the last Inca emperor, murdered by Pizarro; “yet unspoil’d / Guiana”
(a region including Surinam, Guyana, and parts of Venezuela and Brazil) – not yet discovered and plundered by the Spanish. Its chief city, Manoa, was identified with the mythical city of gold, “El Dorado,” by
“Geryons Sons” (the Spanish); in Spenser’s Faerie Queene Geryon, a mythical three-headed monster killed
by Hercules, is an allegory of the great power and oppression of Spain.
414 Euphrasie and Rue. Both herbs were thought to sharpen eyesight.

298

430

435

440

445

450

455

460
 
His eyes he op’nd, and beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth, whereon were Sheaves
New reapt, the other part sheep-walks° and foulds;
Ith’ midst an Altar as the Land-mark° stood
Rustic, of grassie sord;° thither anon
A sweatie Reaper from his Tillage brought
First Fruits, the green Eare, and the yellow Sheaf,
Uncull’d,° as came to hand; a Shepherd next
More meek came with the Firstlings of his Flock
Choicest and best; then sacrificing, laid
The Inwards and thir Fat, with Incense strew’d,
On the cleft Wood, and all due Rites perform’d.
His Offring soon propitious° Fire from Heav’n
Consum’d with nimble glance,° and grateful° steame;
The others not, for his was not sincere;
Whereat hee inlie rag’d, and as they talk’d,
Smote him into the Midriff with a stone
That beat out life; he fell, and deadly pale
Groand out his Soul with gushing bloud effus’d.
Much at that sight was Adam in his heart
Dismai’d, and thus in haste to th’ Angel cri’d.
O Teacher, some great mischief° hath befall’n
To that meek man, who well had sacrific’d;
Is Pietie thus and pure Devotion paid?
T’ whom Michael thus, hee also mov’d, repli’d.
These two are Brethren, Adam, and to come
Out of thy loyns; th’ unjust the just hath slain,
For envie that his Brothers Offering found
From Heav’n acceptance; but the bloodie Fact°
Will be aveng’d, and th’ others Faith approv’d
Loose no reward, though here thou see him die,
Rowling in dust and gore. To which our Sire.
Alas, both for the deed and for the cause!
But have I now seen Death? Is this the way

pasture
boundary-marker
turf

unselected

favoring
quick flash / pleasing

harm, injury

crime

429–47. Milton’s version of the Cain and Abel story provides a clear reason for God’s acceptance of Abel’s
sacrifice, as Gen. 4:1–16 does not. Michael does not name any of the biblical personages or places in Book
11; he sees the scenes but may not know the names these persons or places will bear.
430–1 arable. Land capable of being ploughed.
tilth. Cultivated.
434–7 A sweatie Reaper. Cain. Cf. Gen. 4:2: “And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the
ground.”
441–2. Acceptable sacrifices were often consumed by “Fire from Heav’n”; Cf. Lev. 9:24 and Judg. 6:21.
455. Adam has to be told that these are his own sons, not simply descendants.

Book 11

465

470

475

480

485

490

495

I must return to native dust? O sight
Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!
To whom thus Michael. Death thou hast seen
In his first shape on man; but many shapes
Of Death, and many are the wayes that lead
To his grim Cave, all dismal;° yet to sense
More terrible at th’ entrance then within.
Some, as thou saw’st, by violent stroke shall die,
By Fire, Flood, Famin, by Intemperance more
In Meats and Drinks, which on the Earth shall bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear; that thou mayst know
What miserie th’ inabstinence of Eve
Shall bring on men. Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeard, sad,° noysom,° dark,
A Lazar-house it seemd, wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseas’d, all maladies
Of gastly Spasm, or racking torture, qualmes
Of heart-sick Agonie, all feavorous kinds,
Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs,
Intestin Stone and Ulcer, Colic pangs,
Dæmoniac Phrenzie, moaping Melancholie
And Moon-struck madness, pining Atrophie
Marasmus and wide-wasting Pestilence,
Dropsies, and Asthma’s, and Joint-racking Rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans, despair
Tended the sick busiest from Couch to Couch;
And over them triumphant Death his Dart
Shook, but delaid to strike, though oft invokt
With vows, as thir chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of Rock could long
Drie-ey’d behold? Adam could not, but wept,

299

dreadful

distressing / foul-smelling

477–95. This is the only non-biblical sight presented to Adam, a “Lazar-house” or hospital for leprosy and
other infectious diseases, named for Lazarus (Luke 16:19 –25).
484–8 Stone. Morbid concretion.
Dæmoniac Phrenzie. Manic frenzy, often attributed to possession by evil spirits.
Moon-struck madness. Lunacy.
pining Atrophie. Emaciation.
Marasmus. A wasting away of the body.
wide-wasting Pestilence. Plague (the Great Plague of
1665 had killed over 60,000 Londoners).
Rheums. Rheumatic pains.
491. For Death’s “Dart” see 2.672, 786.

300

500

505

510

515

520

525

530
 
Though not of Woman born; compassion quell’d
His best of Man,° and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restraind excess,
And scarce recovering words his plaint renew’d.
O miserable Mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserv’d!
Better end heer unborn. Why is life giv’n
To be thus wrested from us? rather why
Obtruded° on us thus? who if we knew
What we receive, would either not accept
Life offer’d, or soon beg to lay it down,
Glad to be so dismist in peace. Can thus
Th’ Image of God in man created once
So goodly and erect, though faultie since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debas’t
Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man,
Retaining still Divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And for his Makers Image sake exempt?
Thir Makers Image, answerd Michael, then
Forsook them, when themselves they villifi’d°
To serve ungovern’d appetite, and took
His Image whom they serv’d, a brutish vice,
Inductive° mainly to the sin of Eve.
Therefore so abject is thir punishment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but thir own,
Or if his likeness, by themselves defac’t
While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules
To loathsom sickness, worthily,° since they
Gods Image did not reverence in themselves.
I yield it just, said Adam, and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To Death, and mix with our connatural° dust?
There is, said Michael, if thou well observe
The rule of not too much, by temperance taught
In what thou eatst and drinkst, seeking from thence

manliness, courage

forced

debased

leading on, traceable

deservedly

sharing nature

496 not of Woman born. A man’s tears and softer feelings were attributed to his feminine part; Adam was
created of the dust of the earth, not born of woman. Cf. Macbeth 5.8.13 –18.
511–13. Cf. Christian Doctrine 1.12: “some remnants of the divine image still exist in us, not wholly extinguished by this spiritual death.”
518 His Image. Man does not now bear God’s image but that of “ungovern’d appetite.”

Book 11

535

540

545

550

555

560

Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So maist thou live, till like ripe Fruit thou drop
Into thy Mothers lap, or be with ease
Gatherd, not harshly pluckt, for death mature:
This is old age; but then thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change
To witherd weak and gray; thy Senses then
Obtuse,° all taste of pleasure must forgoe,
To° what thou hast, and for the Aire of youth
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reigne
A melancholly damp of cold and dry
To weigh thy Spirits down, and last consume
The Balme° of Life. To whom our Ancestor.
Henceforth I flie not Death, nor would prolong
Life much, bent rather how I may be quit
Fairest and easiest of this combrous charge,
Which I must keep till my appointed day
Of rendring up, and patiently attend°
My dissolution. Michael repli’d,
Nor love thy Life, nor hate; but what thou livst
Live well, how long or short permit° to Heav’n:
And now prepare thee for another sight.
He lookd and saw a spacious Plaine, whereon
Were Tents of various hue; by some were herds
Of Cattel grazing: others, whence the sound
Of Instruments that made melodious chime
Was heard, of Harp and Organ; and who moovd
Thir stops and chords was seen: his volant° touch
Instinct° through all proportions° low and high
Fled and pursu’d transverse the resonant fugue.
In other part stood one who at the Forge

301

dull
in comparison to

preservative essence

await

leave

moving rapidly, flying
impelled / musical harmonies

542–4 Aire of youth. In assigning elements and humors to the several ages, “Aire” and the sanguine (“cheerful”) temperament arising from the blood were associated with youth; earth, and the melancholy temperament produced by phlegm and black bile (“cold and dry”) were associated with age. Cf. Robert Burton,
Anatomy of Melancholy (1621), 1.2.2, 1.3.5.
damp. Depression of spirits.
556–97 spacious Plaine. Adam’s third vision is based on Gen. 4:20 –2, of the three sons of Lamech, descendants of Cain.
557–8 Tents . . . Cattel. These identify the persons in the first part of this vision with Jabel, “the father of
such as dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle” (Gen. 4:20).
558–63 Instruments. Gen. 4:21 describes his brother Jubel as “father of all such as handle the harp and organ.”
563 fugue. Musical form in which one statement of the theme seems to chase another.
564–73 one who at the forge. Tubal-Cain, the third brother, was “an instructer of every artificer in brass
and iron” (Gen. 4:22).

302
 
565 Labouring, two massie° clods of Iron and Brass

570

575

580

585

590

595

Had melted (whether found where casual° fire
Had wasted woods on Mountain or in Vale,
Down to the veins of Earth, thence gliding hot
To som Caves mouth, or whether washt by stream
From underground) the liquid Ore he dreind
Into fit moulds prepar’d; from which he formd
First his own Tooles; then, what might else be wrought
Fusil° or grav’n° in mettle. After these,
But on the hether side a different sort
From the high neighbouring Hills, which was thir Seat,
Down to the Plain descended: by thir guise
Just men they seemd, and all thir study bent
To worship God aright, and know his works
Not hid, nor those things last which might preserve
Freedom and Peace to men: they on the Plain
Long had not walkt, when from the Tents behold
A Beavie of fair Women, richly gay°
In Gems and wanton dress; to the Harp they sung
Soft amorous Ditties, and in dance came on:
The Men though grave, ey’d them, and let thir eyes
Rove without rein, till in the amorous Net
Fast caught, they lik’d, and each his liking chose;
And now of love they treat° till th’ Eevning Star
Loves Harbinger appeerd; then all in heat°
They light the Nuptial Torch, and bid invoke
Hymen, then first to marriage Rites invok’t;
With Feast and Musick all the Tents resound.
Such happy interview and fair event°
Of love and youth not lost, Songs, Garlands, Flours,
And charming Symphonies° attach’d the heart
Of Adam, soon enclin’d to admit delight,
The bent° of Nature; which he thus express’d.
True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest,
Much better seems this Vision, and more hope

massive
accidental

cast / sculpted

ornamented

talk
animal desire

outcome
harmonious music
end, inclination

574–80 a different sort. The descendants of Seth, Adam’s third son (Gen. 4:25 – 6).
hether side. The
Western (or hither) side, away from the east where Cain’s sons lived.
578–9 works / Not hid. Seth’s descendants were traditionally credited with the discovery of astronomy, a
lawful science not involving the “matters hid” that Raphael warned against. Or, perhaps, a contrast to
Tubal-Cain’s delving for hidden metals (cf. 1.687–8).
588–9 Eevning Star. Venus, planet of love.
591 Hymen. God of marriage.

Book 11

303

600 Of peaceful dayes portends, then those two past;

605

610

615

620

625

630

Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse,
Here Nature seems fulfilld in all her ends.
To whom thus Michael. Judg not what is best
By pleasure, though to Nature seeming meet,
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holie and pure, conformitie divine.
Those Tents thou sawst so pleasant, were the Tents
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his Race
Who slew his Brother; studious they appere
Of Arts that polish Life, Inventers rare,
Unmindful of thir Maker, though his Spirit
Taught them, but they his gifts acknowledg’d none.
Yet they a beauteous ofspring shall beget;
For that fair femal Troop thou sawst, that seemd
Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein consists
Womans domestic honour and chief praise;
Bred onely and completed° to the taste
Of lustful appetence,° to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troule° the Tongue, and roule the Eye.
To these that sober Race of Men, whose lives
Religious titl’d them the Sons of God,
Shall yield up all thir vertue, all thir fame
Ignobly, to the traines° and to the smiles
Of these fair Atheists, and now swim in joy,
(Erelong to swim at large) and laugh; for which
The world erelong a world of tears must weepe.
To whom thus Adam of short joy bereft.
O pittie and shame, that they who to live well
Enterd so faire, should turn aside to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But still I see the tenor of Mans woe
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.
From Mans effeminate slackness it begins,

fully equipped
desire
move, lick the lips

wiles, snares

613–14 a beauteous ofspring. The “Beavie of fair Women” (582).
621–5 Sons of God. Like most exegetes of Gen. 6:2, Milton identifies them as the descendants of Seth; the
women they wed (termed the daughters of men) are the descendants of Cain. Another tradition held that
angels lay with these women (cf. 3.461–3).
625–6 swim. An anticipation of the Flood to come, which Adam does not yet understand.
632–3 woe / . . . Woman. Adam produces another false etymological pun (a misogynist cliché), like his
earlier pun on “Eve . . . evil” (9.1067).

304
 
635 Said th’ Angel, who should better hold his place

640

645

650

655

660

665

By wisdome, and superiour gifts receav’d.
But now prepare thee for another Scene.
He lookd and saw wide Territorie spred
Before him, Towns, and rural works between,
Cities of Men with lofty Gates and Towrs,
Concours° in Arms, fierce Faces threatning Warr,
Giants of mightie Bone, and bould emprise;°
Part wield thir Arms, part courb the foaming Steed,
Single or in Array of Battel rang’d°
Both Horse and Foot, nor idely mustring stood;
One way a Band select° from forage drives
A herd of Beeves, faire Oxen and faire Kine
From a fat° Meddow ground; or fleecy Flock,
Ewes and thir bleating Lambs over the Plaine,
Thir Bootie; scarce with Life the Shepherds flye,
But call in aide, which makes a bloody Fray;
With cruel Tournament the Squadrons joine;
Where Cattle pastur’d late, now scatterd lies
With Carcasses and Arms th’ensanguind° Field
Deserted: Others to a Citie strong
Lay Seige, encampt; by Batterie, Scale, and Mine,
Assaulting; others from the wall defend
With Dart and Jav’lin, Stones and sulfurous Fire;
On each hand slaughter and gigantic deeds.
In other part the scepter’d Haralds call
To Council in the Citie Gates: anon
Grey-headed men and grave, with Warriours mixt,
Assemble, and Harangues are heard, but soon
In factious opposition, till at last
Of middle Age one rising, eminent
In wise deport, spake much of Right and Wrong,
Of Justice, of Religion, Truth and Peace,
And Judgment from above: him old and young

hostile encounters
enterprise, prowess
drawn up in ranks
of picked men
fertile

bloodstained

638–73 Adam’s fourth vision is of the Giant offspring of the previous marriages (683–5). Cf. Gen. 6:4: “There
were giants in the earth in those days, and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men
of renown.” Some details recall scenes from the shield of Achilles – siege, cattle raid, battle, assembly
(Iliad 18.490–616).
656 Batterie. Battering rams.
Scale. Ladders.
Mine. Tunnels under the walls.
665–71 one rising. Enoch, who “walked with God, and he was not, for God took him” (Gen. 5:24). He was
translated to heaven at 365 years of age, “middle Age” compared to other patriarchs (Adam 930, Seth 912).

Book 11

670

675

680

685

690

695

700

Exploded° and had seiz’d with violent hands,
Had not a Cloud descending snatch’d him thence
Unseen amid the throng: so violence
Proceeded, and Oppression, and Sword-Law
Through all the Plain, and refuge none was found.
Adam was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turnd full sad; O what are these,
Deaths Ministers, not Men, who thus deal Death
Inhumanly to men, and multiply
Ten thousandfould the sin of him who slew
His Brother; for of whom such massacher
Make they but of thir Brethren, men of men?
But who was that Just Man, whom had not Heav’n
Rescu’d, had in his Righteousness bin lost?
To whom thus Michael. These are the product
Of those ill mated Marriages thou saw’st:
Where good with bad were matcht, who of themselves
Abhor to joyn; and by imprudence mixt,
Produce prodigious° Births of bodie or mind.
Such were these Giants, men of high renown;
For in those dayes Might onely shall be admir’d,
And Valour and Heroic Vertu call’d;
To overcome in Battle, and subdue
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite
Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch
Of human Glorie, and for Glorie done
Of triumph, to be styl’d great Conquerours,
Patrons of Mankind, Gods, and Sons of Gods,
Destroyers rightlier call’d and Plagues of men.
Thus Fame shall be atchiev’d, renown on Earth,
And what most merits fame in silence hid.
But hee the seventh from thee, whom thou beheldst
The onely righteous in a World perverse,
And therefore hated, therefore so beset

305
mocked, drove out

monstrous

689–99 Might only. The traditional values of epic, which Milton critiques in the Proem to Book 9.
what most merits fame. Cf. 9.31–3, “the better fortitude / Of Patience and Heroic Martyrdom /
Unsung.”
700–9. Jude 14 identifies Enoch as “the seventh from Adam.” Some details are drawn from Jude 14–15, describing Enoch’s prophecy of God’s pronouncing judgment with “ten thousand of his saints” on those “that
are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.” The “Cloud with winged Steeds” may be
taken from Elijah’s translation to heaven (2 Kgs 2:11), often associated with Enoch’s.

306

705

710

715

720

725

730

735
 
With Foes for daring single to be just,
And utter odious Truth, that God would come
To judge them with his Saints: Him the most High
Rapt in a balmie Cloud with winged Steeds
Did, as thou sawst, receave, to walk with God
High in Salvation and the Climes of bliss,
Exempt from Death; to shew thee what reward
Awaits the good, the rest what punishment;
Which° now direct thine eyes and soon behold.
He look’d, and saw the face of things quite chang’d,
The brazen Throat of Warr had ceast to roar,
All now was turn’d to jollitie and game,
To luxurie° and riot,° feast and dance,
Marrying or prostituting, as befell,
Rape or Adulterie, where passing° faire
Allurd them; thence from Cups to civil Broiles.
At length a Reverend Sire among them came,
And of thir doings great dislike declar’d,
And testifi’d against thir wayes; hee oft
Frequented thir Assemblies, whereso met,
Triumphs° or Festivals, and to them preachd
Conversion and Repentance, as to Souls
In prison under Judgments imminent:
But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceas’d
Contending, and remov’d his Tents farr off;
Then from the Mountain hewing Timber tall,
Began to build a Vessel of huge bulk,
Measur’d by Cubit, length, and breadth, and highth,
Smeard round with Pitch, and in the side a dore
Contriv’d, and of provisions laid in large
For Man and Beast: when loe a wonder strange!
Of every Beast, and Bird, and Insect small
Came seavens, and pairs, and enterd in, as taught
Thir order: last the Sire, and his three Sons

to which

lust / debauchery
surpassing, passing by

triumphal processions

703 daring single to be just. Cf. Abdiel at 6.30–2.
712–53. Adam’s fifth vision, of the general depravity of humans, the Flood, and Noah (“a Reverend Sire,”
719) is based on Gen. 6:5–9:17. The “Sea without shoar” (750) and some other details of lines 738–53 are
taken from the story of Deucalion’s Flood in Metamorphoses 1.262–347.
730 Cubit. Ancient unit of measurement, from the elbow to the fingertip; the ark was 300 by 50 by 30 cubits
(Gen. 6:15).
735 seavens, and pairs. Cf. Gen. 7:2, “Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and
his female; and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female.”

Book 11

740

745

750

755

760

765

770

With thir four Wives; and God made fast the dore.
Meanwhile the Southwind rose, and with black wings
Wide hovering, all the Clouds together drove
From under Heav’n; the Hills to their supplie°
Vapour, and Exhalation dusk° and moist,
Sent up amain;° and now the thick’nd Skie
Like a dark Ceeling stood; down rush’d the Rain
Impetuous, and continu’d till the Earth
No more was seen; the floating Vessel swum
Uplifted; and secure with beaked prow
Rode tilting o’re the Waves, all dwellings else
Flood overwhelmd, and them with all thir pomp
Deep under water rould; Sea cover’d Sea,
Sea without shoar; and in thir Palaces
Where luxurie late reign’d, Sea-monsters whelp’d
And stabl’d; of Mankind, so numerous late,
All left, in one small bottom° swum imbark’t.
How didst thou grieve then, Adam, to behold
The end of all thy Ofspring, end so sad,
Depopulation; thee another Floud,
Of tears and sorrow a Floud thee also drown’d,
And sunk thee as thy Sons; till gently reard
By th’ Angel, on thy feet thou stoodst at last,
Though comfortless, as when a Father mourns
His Children, all in view destroyd at once;
And scarce° to th’ Angel utterdst thus thy plaint.
O Visions ill foreseen! better had I
Liv’d ignorant of future, so had borne
My part of evil onely, each dayes lot
Anough to beare; those now, that were dispenst°
The burd’n of many Ages, on me light°
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining Birth
Abortive, to torment me ere thir being,
With thought that they must be. Let no man seek
Henceforth to be foretold what shall befall
Him or his Childern, evil he may be sure,

307

assistance
dark mist
with main force

boat

barely able

given
alight

764–6. Cf. Matt. 6:34: “Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.”
768 foreknowledge. The term suggests that Adam is experiencing something akin to God’s foreknowledge,
which the poem insists is not predestination. Adam knows what is to happen but can neither cause it nor
prevent it.
768–9 Birth / Abortive. Their birth seems to Adam both monstrous and too soon born.

308

775

780

785

790

795

800

805

810
 
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent,
And hee the future evil shall no less
In apprehension then in substance feel
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,
Man is not whom° to warne: those few escapt
Famin and anguish will at last consume
Wandring that watrie Desert: I had hope
When violence was ceas’t, and Warr on Earth,
All would have then gon well, peace would have crownd
With length of happy dayes the race of man;
But I was farr deceav’d; for now I see
Peace to corrupt no less then Warr to waste.
How comes it thus? unfould, Celestial Guide,
And whether here the Race of man will end.
To whom thus Michael. Those whom last thou sawst
In Triumph and luxurious wealth, are they
First seen in acts of prowess eminent
And great exploits, but of true vertu void;
Who having spilt much blood, and don much waste
Subduing Nations, and achievd thereby
Fame in the World, high titles, and rich prey,
Shall change thir course to pleasure, ease, and sloth,
Surfet, and lust, till wantonness and pride
Raise out of friendship hostil deeds in Peace.
The conquerd also, and enslav’d by Warr
Shall with thir freedom lost all vertu loose
And fear of God, from whom thir pietie feign’d
In sharp contest of Battel found no aide
Against invaders; therefore coold in zeale
Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure,
Worldlie or dissolute, on what thir Lords
Shall leave them to enjoy; for th’ Earth shall bear
More then anough, that temperance may be tri’d:°
So all shall turn degenerate, all deprav’d,
Justice and Temperance, Truth and Faith forgot;
One Man except, the onely Son of light
In a dark Age, against example good,
Against allurement, custom, and a World

No one is left

tested

797–806. These lines may also allude to the backsliding Puritans who betrayed the Commonwealth in 1660
and have now taken on the vices of the restored royalists.
808 One Man except. Noah.

Book 11

815

820

825

830

835

840

845

Offended;° fearless of reproach and scorn,
Or violence, hee of wicked wayes
Shall them admonish, and before them set
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe,
And full of peace, denouncing° wrauth to come
On thir impenitence; and shall returne
Of them derided, but of God observd
The one just Man alive; by his command
Shall build a wondrous Ark, as thou beheldst,
To save himself and houshold from amidst
A World devote° to universal rack.°
No sooner hee with them of Man and Beast
Select° for life shall in the Ark be lodg’d,
And shelterd round, but all the Cataracts°
Of Heav’n set open on the Earth shall powre
Raine day and night, all fountains of the Deep
Broke up, shall heave the Ocean to usurp
Beyond all bounds, till inundation rise
Above the highest Hills: then shall this Mount
Of Paradise by might of Waves be moovd
Out of his place, pushd by the horned floud,
With all his verdure spoil’d, and Trees adrift
Down the great River to the op’ning Gulf,
And there take root an Iland salt and bare,
The haunt of Seales and Orcs,° and Sea-mews° clang.
To teach thee that God attributes to place
No sanctitie, if none be thither brought
By Men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now what further shall ensue, behold.
He lookd, and saw the Ark hull° on the floud,
Which now abated, for the Clouds were fled,
Drivn by a keen North-winde, that blowing drie
Wrinkl’d the face of Deluge, as decai’d;
And the cleer Sun on his wide watrie Glass
Gaz’d hot, and of the fresh Wave largely drew,
As after thirst, which made thir flowing shrink
From standing lake to tripping ebbe,° that stole
With soft foot towards the deep, who now had stopt

309
hostile

proclaiming

doomed / destruction
chosen
floodgates

whales / gulls

drift

running ebbtide

831 horned floud. Classical river gods were often depicted as horned.
833 the great River. The Euphrates (see Gen. 15:18).
the op’ning Gulf. The Persian Gulf.
844–6. Cf. 5.423–6.

310

850

855

860

865

870

875

880
 
His Sluces,° as the Heav’n his windows shut.
The Ark no more now flotes, but seems on ground
Fast on the top of som high mountain fixt.
And now the tops of Hills as Rocks appeer;
With clamor thence the rapid Currents drive
Towards the retreating Sea thir furious tyde.
Forthwith from out the Arke a Raven flies,
And after him, the surer messenger,
A Dove sent forth once and agen to spie
Green Tree or ground whereon his foot may light;
The second time returning, in his Bill
An Olive leafe he brings, pacific signe:
Anon drie ground appeers, and from his Arke
The ancient Sire descends with all his Train;
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful° to Heav’n, over his head beholds
A dewie Cloud, and in the Cloud a Bow
Conspicuous with three listed colours gay,
Betok’ning peace from God, and Cov’nant new.
Whereat the heart of Adam erst° so sad
Greatly rejoyc’d, and thus his joy broke forth.
O thou who future things canst represent
As present, Heav’nly instructer, I revive
At this last sight, assur’d that Man shall live
With all the Creatures, and thir seed preserve.
Farr less I now lament for one whole World
Of wicked Sons destroyd, then I rejoyce
For one Man found so perfet and so just,
That God voutsafes to raise another World
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But say, what mean those colourd streaks in Heavn,
Distended° as the Brow of God appeas’d,
Or serve they as a flourie verge° to binde
The fluid skirts of that same watrie Cloud,
Least it again dissolve and showr the Earth?

gates

expressing gratitude, pleasing,

previously

spread out
border, boundary

851 som high mountain. Mount Ararat (Gen. 8:4).
857–60 once and agen. Noah sent forth a “Dove” twice; the first time it failed to “spie” land, the second
time it returned with an “Olive leafe” (Gen. 8:8–12), a sign of peace (“pacific signe”).
866 three listed colours. Bands of the primary colors, red, blue, and yellow.
gay. Bright.
867 Cov’nant new. See below, 892–5 and note.
876–8. The language invites recognition of Noah as a type (foreshadowing) of Christ, the one “perfet” and
“just” who will cause God to forget “his anger.”

Book 11

885

890

895

900

311

To whom th’ Archangel. Dextrously thou aim’st;
So willingly doth God remit his Ire,
Though late repenting him of Man deprav’d,
Griev’d at his heart, when looking down he saw
The whole Earth fill’d with violence, and all flesh
Corrupting each thir way; yet those remoov’d,
Such grace shall one just Man find in his sight,
That he relents, not to blot out mankind,
And makes a Covenant never to destroy
The Earth again by flood, nor let the Sea
Surpass his bounds, nor Rain to drown the World
With Man therein or Beast; but when he brings
Over the Earth a Cloud, will therein set
His triple-colour’d Bow, whereon to look
And call to mind his Cov’nant: Day and Night,
Seed time and Harvest, Heat and hoary Frost
Shall hold thir course, till fire purge all things new,
Both Heav’n and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell.
The End of the Eleventh Book.

886–7. Cf. Gen. 6:6: “it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his
heart.”
892–5. This covenant marked by the rainbow – that God will not again destroy the earth by flood (Gen.
9:15–17) – is a type of the covenant of grace through which God will save humankind.
899. Cf. Gen. 8:22: “While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and
winter, and day and night shall not cease.”
900–1. The restoration of nature following the Flood is seen as a type of the renewal of all things after the
final conflagration at the Last Judgment, “new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness”
(2 Pet. 3:13).

BOOK 12
THE ARGUMENT
The Angel Michael continues from the Flood to relate what shall succeed; then, in
the mention of Abraham, comes by degrees to explain, who that Seed of the Woman
shall be, which was promised Adam and Eve in the Fall; his Incarnation, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascention; the state of the Church till his second Coming. Adam
5 greatly satisfied and recomforted by these Relations and Promises descends the Hill
with Michael; wakens Eve, who all this while had slept, but with gentle dreams compos’d to quietness of mind and submission. Michael in either hand leads them out
of Paradise, the fiery Sword waving behind them, and the Cherubim taking thir
Stations to guard the Place.

5

10

15

20

As one who in his journey bates° at Noone,
Though bent on speed, so heer the Archangel paus’d
Betwixt the world destroy’d and world restor’d,
If Adam aught perhaps might interpose;
Then with transition sweet new Speech resumes.
Thus thou hast seen one World begin and end;
And Man as from a second stock proceed.
Much thou hast yet to see, but I perceave
Thy mortal sight to faile; objects divine
Must needs impaire and wearie human sense:
Henceforth what is to com I will relate,
Thou therefore give due audience, and attend.
This second sours of Men, while yet but few;
And while the dread of judgement past remains
Fresh in thir mindes, fearing the Deitie,
With some regard to what is just and right
Shall lead thir lives and multiplie apace,
Labouring° the soile, and reaping plenteous crop,
Corn wine and oyle; and from the herd or flock,
Oft sacrificing Bullock, Lamb, or Kid,
With large Wine-offerings pour’d, and sacred Feast,
Shal spend thir dayes in joy unblam’d, and dwell

stops for refreshment

tilling

1 succeed. Follow after.
7 second stock. from Noah himself, but also as a type of Christ in whom believers are ingrafted; see 3.287–89.
9 mortal sight to faile. Adam no longer sees the visions or pageants as before, but simply listens to Michael’s
narration; cf. Rom. 10:17, “So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.” Michael,
however, continues to see the visions (128).

Book 12

25

30

35

40

45

50

Long time in peace by Families and Tribes
Under paternal rule; till one shall rise
Of proud ambitious heart, who not content
With fair equalitie, fraternal state,
Will arrogate Dominion undeserv’d
Over his brethren, and quite dispossess
Concord and law of Nature from the Earth,
Hunting (and Men not Beasts shall be his game)
With Warr and hostile snare such as refuse
Subjection to his Empire tyrannous:
A mightie Hunter thence he shall be styl’d
Before the Lord, as in despite of Heav’n,
Or from Heav’n claming second Sovrantie;
And from Rebellion shall derive his name,
Though of Rebellion others he accuse.
Hee with a crew, whom like Ambition joyns
With him or under him to tyrannize,
Marching from Eden towards the West, shall finde
The Plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge°
Boiles out from under ground, the mouth of Hell;
Of Brick, and of that stuff they cast° to build
A Citie and Towre, whose top may reach to Heav’n;
And get themselves a name,° least far disperst
In foraign Lands thir memorie be lost
Regardless whether good or evil fame.
But God who oft descends to visit men
Unseen, and through thir habitations walks
To mark thir doings, them beholding soon,

313

whirlpool
decide
reputation

24–35 one. Nimrod. Cf. Gen. 10:8–10: “And Cain begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth.
He was a mighty hunter before the Lord . . . And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel.” Milton identifies
Nimrod as the first king, in terms that equate kingship with tyranny. He explains “before the Lord” as
meaning either that he openly defied God (“despite,” 34) or that he claimed divine right (“second
Sovrantie,” 35) from heaven, like the Stuart kings.
29 law of Nature. Grounded in reason, and dictating a government based on “fair equalitie, fraternal state” (26).
36–7. Drawing upon a false etymology linking the name Nimrod with the Hebrew “to rebel,” Milton
associates Nimrod with kingship generally (cf. 1.484 and 6.199 for other rebel kings). The lines allude also
especially to Charles I, who accused the Puritans of rebellion in the Civil War but who in Milton’s view
was himself a rebel against God for usurping the absolute monarchy belonging only to God.
40–59 Plain. The plain of Shinar in ancient Babylon (“Sennaar,” 3.467). Gen. 11:4 describes the building of
the “Towre” of Babel and refers to the “Citie” (Babylon). “And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and
a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven, and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon
the face of the whole earth.” Though Genesis does not directly associate Nimrod with the tower, he was
traditionally made responsible for both tower and city (Gen. 10:9 –10).

314

55

60

65

70

75

80
 
Comes down to see thir Citie, ere the Tower
Obstruct Heav’n Towrs, and in derision sets
Upon thir Tongues a various° Spirit to rase°
Quite out thir Native Language, and instead
To sow a jangling noise of words unknown:
Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud
Among the Builders; each to other calls
Not understood, till hoarse, and all in rage,
As mockt they storm; great laughter was in Heav’n
And looking down, to see the hubbub strange
And hear the din; thus was the building left
Ridiculous, and the work Confusion nam’d.
Whereto thus Adam fatherly displeas’d.
O execrable Son so to aspire
Above his Brethren, to himself assuming
Authoritie usurpt, from God not giv’n:
He gave us onely over Beast, Fish, Fowl
Dominion absolute; that right we hold
By his donation; but Man over men
He made not Lord; such title to himself
Reserving, human left from human free.
But this Usurper his encroachment proud
Stayes not on° Man; to God his Tower intends
Siege and defiance: Wretched man! what food
Will he convey up thither to sustain
Himself and his rash Armie, where thin Aire
Above the Clouds will pine° his entrails gross,
And famish him of Breath, if not of Bread?
To whom thus Michael. Justly thou abhorr’st
That Son, who on the quiet state of men
Such trouble brought, affecting° to subdue
Rational Libertie; yet know withall,
Since thy original lapse, true Libertie
Is lost, which alwayes with right Reason dwells

divisive / obliterate

stops not with

waste away

aspiring

62 Confusion. Taken to be the meaning of “Babel,” where God in punishment confounded the original language of humans into multiple languages (Gen. 11:9).
64–71 aspire / Above his Brethren. Adam’s response suggests that republicanism is a matter of natural law,
clearly understood as such by Adam; he echoes an argument Milton often invoked to support republicanism against monarchy.
81–90 Rational Libertie. As Milton often did and as Abdiel did earlier (6.179 – 81), Michael links political to
psychological servility, and political liberty to inner freedom, i.e., the exercise of “right Reason” and control of passions.

Book 12
85

90

95

100

105

110

Twinn’d, and from her hath no dividual° being:
Reason in man obscur’d, or not obeyd,
Immediately inordinate desires
And upstart Passions catch° the Government
From Reason, and to servitude reduce
Man till then free. Therefore since hee permits
Within himself unworthie Powers to reign
Over free Reason, God in Judgement just
Subjects him from without to violent Lords;
Who oft as undeservedly enthrall
His outward freedom: Tyrannie must be,
Though to the Tyrant thereby no excuse.
Yet somtimes Nations will decline so low
From vertue, which is reason, that no wrong,
But Justice, and some fatal curse annext
Deprives them of thir outward libertie,
Thir inward lost: Witness th’ irreverent Son
Of him who built the Ark, who for the shame
Don to his Father, heard this heavie curse,
Servant of Servants, on his vitious Race.
Thus will this latter, as the former World,
Still tend from bad to worse, till God at last
Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw
His presence from among them, and avert
His holy Eyes; resolving from thenceforth
To leave them to thir own polluted wayes;
And one peculiar Nation to select
From all the rest, of whom to be invok’d,
A Nation from one faithful man to spring:

315
separate

seize

90–101. This passage, presenting loss of liberty as often (though not always) God’s punishment for a nation’s
servility. implicitly interprets the Restoration of Charles II as a divine judgment on the baseness of the
English.
101–4 th’ irreverent Son. Ham, son of Noah, looked on the nakedness of his father and brought down Noah’s
curse upon himself and his “vitious Race” (depraved descendants): “Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren” (Gen. 9:25). Milton is probably thinking of the Canaanites (descendants of Ham’s son Canaan), since “Race” did not carry its modern meaning. Noah’s curse was used, however,
to justify black slavery, as blacks came to be classed among Ham’s descendants.
111 one peculiar Nation. Israel, specially chosen by God, cf. Deut. 14:2, “The Lord hath chosen thee to be
a peculiar people unto himself.” In Christian Doctrine 1.4 Milton notes the “national election, by which
God chose the whole nation of Israel for his own people.” And, like many Puritans, he thought for a time
that God had chosen England as a new Israel.
113 one faithful man. Abraham, whose name means “father of many nations.” Lines 113 –51 are based on
Gen. 11:27–17:9.

316

115

120

125

130

135

140
 
Him on this side Euphrates yet residing,
Bred up in Idol-worship; O that men
(Canst thou believe?) should be so stupid grown,
While yet the Patriark liv’d, who scap’d the Flood,
As to forsake the living God, and fall
To worship thir own work in Wood and Stone
For Gods! yet him God the most High voutsafes
To call by Vision from his Fathers house,
His kindred and false Gods, into a Land
Which he will shew him, and from him will raise
A mightie Nation, and upon him showre
His benediction so, that in his Seed
All Nations shall be blest; he straight° obeys
Not knowing to what Land, yet firm believes:
I see him, but thou canst not, with what Faith
He leaves his Gods, his Friends, and native Soile
Ur of Chaldæa, passing now the Ford
To Haran, after a cumbrous Train
Of Herds and Flocks, and numerous servitude;°
Not wandring poor, but trusting all his wealth
With God, who call’d him, in a land unknown.
Canaan he now attains, I see his Tents
Pitcht about Sechem, and the neighbouring Plaine
Of Moreh; there by promise he receaves
Gift to his Progenie of all that Land;
From Hamath Northward to the Desert South
(Things by thir names I call, though yet unnam’d)

immediately

servants and slaves

115 Bred up in Idol-worship. Tereh, Abraham’s father, worshiped idols.
117 Patriark. Noah, who lived 350 years after the Flood.
125–6 his Seed. Cf. Gen. 12:3: “in thee shall all families of the earth be blest.” Michael restates that prophecy
and applies it to the Messiah, the Seed of the woman (148 –50).
127–9 with what Faith. Cf. Heb. 11:8: “By faith Abraham, when he was called . . . obeyed; and he went
out, not knowing whither he went.” Adam, who no longer sees the visions, must accept the story of Abraham
by “Faith,” analogous to the faith Abraham himself displays.
130 Ur. A city on the west bank of the Euphrates, in the region of “Chaldæa.”
131 Haran. A city in northwestern Mesopotamia (now Turkey), reached by a “Ford” across one of the tributaries of the Euphrates.
135 Canaan. The Promised Land of the Hebrews, in the area of modern Israel and the West Bank.
136 Sechem. Modern Nablus, a city in central Canaan.
137–46 by promise. Cf. God’s promise to Abraham (Gen. 12:7), “Unto thy seed will I give this land.” Also
Gen. 17:8, “I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the
land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession.” The Promised Land was bounded on the north by
“Hamath,” a city on the Orontes river in west Syria; on the south by the wilderness (“Desert”) of Zin; on
the east by “Mount Hermon”; and on the west by the Mediterranean Sea, the “great Western Sea.”

Book 12

145

150

155

160

165

170

From Hermon East to the great Western Sea,
Mount Hermon, yonder Sea, each place behold
In prospect, as I point them; on the shoare
Mount Carmel; here the double-founted stream
Jordan, true limit Eastward; but his Sons
Shall dwell to Senir, that long ridge of Hills.
This ponder, that all Nations of the Earth
Shall in his Seed be blessed; by that Seed
Is meant thy great deliverer, who shall bruise
The Serpents head; whereof to thee anon
Plainlier shall be reveald. This Patriarch blest,
Whom faithful Abraham due time shall call,
A Son, and of his Son a Grand-childe leaves,
Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown;
The Grandchilde with twelve Sons increast, departs
From Canaan, to a land hereafter call’d
Egypt, divided by the River Nile;
See where it flows, disgorging at seaven mouthes
Into the Sea: to sojourn in that Land
He comes invited by a yonger Son
In time of dearth,° a Son whose worthy deeds
Raise him to be the second in that Realme
Of Pharao: there he dies, and leaves his Race
Growing into a Nation, and now grown
Suspected to° a sequent° King, who seeks
To stop thir overgrowth,° as inmate° guests
Too numerous; whence of guests he makes them slaves
Inhospitably, and kills thir infant Males:
Till by two brethren (those two brethren call
Moses and Aaron) sent from God to claime
His people from enthralment, they return
With glory and spoile back to thir promis’d Land.

317

famine

by / succeeding
overpopulation / foreign

143–7 Mount Carmel. A mountain range near Haifa, on the Mediterranean coast of Israel.
Jordan. The
river was thought incorrectly to have two sources (“double-founted”), the Jor and the Dan.
Senir.
A ridge of Mount Hermon.
152 faithful Abraham. This is the first personal name Michael identifies; he later supplies several names of
persons and places. Abraham is given the epithet “faithful” by Paul in Gal. 3:9.
153 Son. Isaac.
Grand-childe. Jacob.
155–64. Jacob’s son Joseph, the next youngest of his twelve sons, rose to a high position in Egypt and invited
his father and brothers to that land to escape famine; his story is told in Gen. 37–50.
158. Adam can evidently see geographical features, but not the scenes or persons Michael sees and describes.
165–214. The story of the Israelites enslaved in Egypt and freed by “Moses” and “Aaron” is told in Exod. 1–14.
172 spoile. “jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment” (Exod. 12:35).

318

175

180

185

190

195

200
 
But first the lawless Tyrant, who denies°
To know thir God, or message to regard,
Must be compelld by Signes and Judgements dire;
To blood unshed the Rivers must be turnd,
Frogs, Lice and Flies must all his Palace fill
With loath’d intrusion, and fill all the land;
His Cattel must of Rot and Murren° die,
Botches° and blaines° must all his flesh imboss,
And all his people; Thunder mixt with Haile,
Haile mixt with fire must rend th’ Egyptian Skie
And wheel on th’ Earth, devouring where it rouls;
What it devours not, Herb, or Fruit, or Graine,
A darksom Cloud of Locusts swarming down
Must eat, and on the ground leave nothing green:
Darkness must overshadow all his bounds,
Palpable darkness, and blot out three dayes;
Last with one midnight stroke all the first-born
Of Egypt must lie dead. Thus with ten wounds°
The River-dragon tam’d at length submits
To let his sojourners depart, and oft
Humbles his stubborn heart, but still as Ice
More hard’nd after thaw, till in his rage
Pursuing whom he late dismissd, the Sea
Swallows him with his Host, but them lets pass
As on drie land between two christal walls,
Aw’d by the rod of Moses so to stand
Divided, till his rescu’d gain thir shoar:
Such wondrous power God to his Saint° will lend,
Though present in his Angel, who shall goe
Before them in a Cloud, and Pillar of Fire,
By day a Cloud, by night a Pillar of Fire,

refuses

plagues affecting cattle
boils, tumors / blisters

plagues

holy person

175–90 Signes and Judgements. The ten plagues God sent upon the Egyptians to force Pharaoh to release
the Israelites.
191 River-dragon. Literally, the crocodile, here referring to the Egyptian Pharaoh, termed “the great dragon
that lieth in the midst of his rivers” (Ezek. 29:3).
193–4 Ice / More hard’nd. Ice which thawed and then was refrozen was thought to be harder than nevermelted ice.
194–214 Sea / Swallows him. Pharaoh’s forces (“Host”) were drowned in the Red Sea as it rushed back
after the “rod of Moses” caused it to divide, forming “two crystal walls” which the Israelites passed between
(Exod. 14:5–31.).
201–4 present in his Angel. Milton’s explanation, here and also in Christian Doctrine 1.5, as to how the Lord
guided his people in a “Cloud” and a “Pillar of Fire” (Exod. 13:21–2).

Book 12

205

210

215

220

225

230

235

To guide them in thir journey, and remove
Behinde them, while th’ obdurat King pursues:
All night he will pursue, but his approach
Darkness defends° between till morning Watch;
Then through the Firey Pillar and the Cloud
God looking forth will trouble all his Host
And craze° thir Chariot wheels: when by command
Moses once more his potent Rod extends
Over the Sea; the Sea his Rod obeys;
On thir imbattelld ranks the Waves return,
And overwhelm thir Warr:° the Race elect°
Safe towards Canaan from the shoar advance
Through the wilde Desert, not the readiest way,
Least entring on the Canaanite allarmd°
Warr terrifie them inexpert,° and feare
Return them back to Egypt, choosing rather
Inglorious life with servitude; for life
To noble and ignoble is more sweet
Untraind in Armes, where rashness leads not on.
This also shall they gain by thir delay
In the wide Wilderness, there they shall found
Thir government, and thir great Senate choose
Through the twelve Tribes, to rule by Laws ordaind:
God from the Mount of Sinai, whose gray top
Shall tremble, he descending, will himself
In Thunder Lightning and loud Trumpets sound
Ordaine them Lawes; part such as appertaine
To civil Justice, part religious Rites
Of sacrifice, informing them, by types
And shadowes, of that destind Seed to bruise
The Serpent, by what meanes he shall achieve
Mankinds deliverance. But the voice of God

319

prevents

shatter

armies / chosen people

aroused, called to arms
inexperienced, unskilled

216 not the readiest way. The Israelites’ passage through the desert lasted thirty-eight years (Exod.
13:17–18).
225 great Senate. The Seventy Elders of the Sanhedrin (Num. 11:16 –25), which Milton cites as a divinely
ordained pattern of republican government in his Readie and Easie Way (1660).
226–32 Laws. God delivered ceremonial, civil, and moral/religious laws (the Ten Commandments) to Moses
on “the Mount of Sinai,” with “Thunder Lightning and loud Trumpets” (Exod. 19 –23).
232–3 types / And shadowes. The principle of typology, whereby persons and events in the Hebrew Bible
are understood to prefigure Christ or matters pertaining to his life or to the church.

320

240

245

250

255

260

265
 
To mortal eare is dreadful; they beseech
That Moses might report to them his will,
And terror cease; he grants what they besaught
Instructed that to God is no access
Without Mediator, whose high Office now
Moses in figure beares, to introduce
One greater, of whose day he shall foretell,
And all the Prophets in thir Age the times
Of great Messiah shall sing. Thus Laws and Rites
Establisht, such delight hath God in Men
Obedient to his will, that he voutsafes
Among them to set up his Tabernacle,
The holy One with mortal Men to dwell:
By his prescript a Sanctuary is fram’d
Of Cedar, overlaid with Gold, therein
An Ark, and in the Ark his Testimony,
The Records of his Cov’nant, over these
A Mercie-seat of Gold between the wings
Of two bright Cherubim, before him burn
Seaven Lamps as in a Zodiac° representing
The Heav’nly fires; over the Tent a Cloud
Shall rest by Day, a fiery gleame by Night,
Save when they journie, and at length they come,
Conducted by his Angel to the Land
Promisd to Abraham and his Seed: the rest
Were long to tell, how many Battels fought,
How many Kings destroyd, and Kingdoms won,
Or how the Sun shall in mid Heav’n stand still
A day entire, and Nights due course adjourne,
Mans voice commanding, Sun in Gibeon stand,
And thou Moon in the vale of Aialon,

like the planets

236–8. Cf. the Israelites’ plea to Moses, “Speak thou with us and we will hear: but let not God speak with
us, lest we die” (Exod. 20:19).
240–4 Mediator. Moses is a type (“figure”) of Christ in his role as mediator between the people and God;
“all the Prophets”: in Christian typological explication, the prophets of the Hebrew Bible were read as
foretelling Christ as Messiah.
247–56 Tabernacle. A portable “Sanctuary” (Exod. 25–6).
256–7. Cloud . . . fiery gleame. Described in Exod. 40:38.
259–60 Land. Canaan; see 137–46 and note.
263–9. At Joshua’s bidding, the sun stood still in “Gibeon,” and the moon in “Aialon,” (both a few miles north
of Jerusalem) “until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies,” the Amorites ( Josh.
10:12–13).
Israel. Isaac’s son Jacob was named Israel (“He that striveth with God”) and his descendants (“descent”) would come to be known as the Children of Israel (Gen. 32:28).

Book 12

270

275

280

285

290

295

Till Israel overcome; so call the third
From Abraham, Son of Isaac, and from him
His whole descent, who thus shall Canaan win.
Here Adam interpos’d. O sent from Heav’n,
Enlightner of my darkness, gracious things
Thou hast reveald, those chiefly which concerne
Just Abraham and his Seed: now first I finde
Mine eyes true op’ning, and my heart much eas’d,
Erwhile perplext with thoughts what would becom
Of mee and all Mankind; but now I see
His day, in whom all Nations shall be blest,
Favour unmerited by me, who sought
Forbidd’n knowledge by forbidd’n means.
This yet I apprehend not, why to those
Among whom God will deigne to dwell on Earth
So many and so various Laws are giv’n;
So many Laws argue° so many sins
Among them; how can God with such reside?
To whom thus Michael. Doubt not but that sin
Will reign among them, as of thee begot;
And therefore was Law given them to evince°
Thir natural pravitie,° by stirring up
Sin against Law to fight; that when they see
Law can discover sin, but not remove,
Save by those shadowie expiations weak,
The bloud of Bulls and Goats, they may conclude
Some bloud more precious must be paid for Man,
Just for unjust, that in such righteousness
To them by Faith imputed, they may finde
Justification towards God, and peace
Of Conscience, which the Law by Ceremonies
Cannot appease, nor Man the moral part
Perform, and not performing cannot live.

321

indicate

make evident
depravity (original sin)

273–7 Mine eyes true op’ning. Adam supposes that the promise made to him pertains to Abraham’s seed,
but he has yet to understand that Abraham is, in this, a type of Christ (see below, 446 –50).
291–9 shadowie expiations. The ceremonial sacrifices of “Bulls and Goats” under the Law are types pointing to Christ’s efficacious sacrifice, which alone can win “Justification” for humankind, by Christ’s merits
being “imputed,” attributed vicariously, to them through “Faith.” The theological doctrine of justification
holds that fallen humans cannot perform the commandments of the Law, or appease God through ceremonial sacrifices. Cf. Gal. 2:16: “A man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ.”

322
 
300 So Law appears imperfet, and but° giv’n

305

310

315

320

325

With purpose to resign° them in full time
Up to a better Cov’nant, disciplin’d
From shadowie Types to Truth, from Flesh to Spirit,
From imposition of strict Laws, to free
Acceptance of large Grace, from servil fear
To filial, works of Law to works of Faith.
And therefore shall not Moses, though of God
Highly belov’d, being but the Minister
Of Law, his people into Canaan lead;
But Joshua whom the Gentiles Jesus call,
His Name and Office bearing, who shall quell
The adversarie Serpent, and bring back
Through the worlds wilderness long wanderd man
Safe to eternal Paradise of rest.
Meanwhile they in thir earthly Canaan plac’t
Long time shall dwell and prosper, but° when sins
National interrupt thir public peace,
Provoking God to raise them enemies:
From whom as oft he saves them penitent
By Judges first, then under Kings; of whom
The second, both for pietie renownd
And puissant deeds, a promise shall receive
Irrevocable, that his Regal Throne
For ever shall endure; the like shall sing
All Prophecie, That of the Royal Stock
Of David (so I name this King) shall rise
A Son, the Womans Seed to thee foretold,
Foretold to Abraham, as in whom shall trust
All Nations, and to Kings foretold, of Kings

only
yield

except

300–6. A more complete exposition of the theological concept of typology, according to which Judaism foreshadows and is perfected by Christianity, the Old Law of justice is fulfilled in the New Law of love, and
the covenant made with Moses is superseded by a “better Cov’nant,” the covenant of grace (cf. Heb. 8:6).
310–14 Jesus. The Greek equivalent of the Hebrew “Joshua,” who, rather than Moses, led the Children of
Israel into the promised land of Canaan, being in this a type of Christ leading his people to the heavenly
paradise.
320–34 Judges. Military leaders. The history briefly summarized here is recounted in Judges, 1 and 2 Sam.,
and 1 and 2 Kgs.
321–4 The second. The second king of Israel was David, promised by the prophet Nathan that “thy throne
shall be established for ever” (2 Sam. 7:16).
325–7 Royal Stock. The Messiah was prophesied to come of David’s lineage, and Jesus was referred to as
Son of David (Luke 1:32).

Book 12

323

330 The last, for of his Reign shall be no end.

335

340

345

350

355

But first a long succession must ensue,
And his next Son for Wealth and Wisdom fam’d,
The clouded Ark of God till then in Tents
Wandring, shall in a glorious Temple enshrine.
Such follow him, as shall be registerd
Part good, part bad, of bad the longer scrowle,
Whose foul Idolatries, and other faults
Heapt° to the popular° summe, will so incense
God, as to leave them, and expose thir Land,
Thir Citie, his Temple, and his holy Ark
With all his sacred things, a scorn and prey
To that proud Citie, whose high Walls thou saw’st
Left in confusion, Babylon thence call’d.
There in captivitie he lets them dwell
The space of seventie years, then brings them back,
Remembring mercie, and his Cov’nant sworn
To David, stablisht as the dayes of Heav’n.
Returnd from Babylon by leave of Kings
Thir Lords, whom God dispos’d,° the house of God
They first re-edifie, and for a while
In mean estate live moderate, till grown
In wealth and multitude, factious they grow;
But first among the Priests dissension springs,
Men who attend the Altar, and should most
Endeavour Peace: thir strife pollution brings
Upon the Temple it self: at last they seise
The Scepter, and regard not Davids Sons,°
Then loose it to a stranger, that the true
Anointed King Messiah might be born

added / people’s

inclined (to permit)

descendants

332–4 his next Son. Solomon, noted for “Wisdom,” built a “glorious Temple” to house the Ark of the Covenant
(1 Kgs 6–7).
clouded Ark. So called because “a cloud covered the tent of the congregation” which
held the Ark when the Israelites wandered in the desert (Exod. 40:34).
339–45 proud Citie. Babylon. The Babylonian captivity and the destruction of the Temple (sixth century
BCE) are recounted in 2 Kgs 25 and Jer. 39:1–10.
346–50 Cov’nant sworn. The promise to David to make “his throne as the days of heaven” (Ps. 89:29).
leave of Kings. The Persian kings Cyrus the Great, Darius, and Artaxerxes allowed the Israelites to return
from Babylon and rebuild the Temple (Ezra).
353–7 Priests dissension. Strife among the priests allowed the Selucid king Antiochus IV to sack Jerusalem
and pollute the Temple; then one of the priestly family of the Maccabees, Aristobulus I, seized the “Scepter,”
disregarding the claims of David’s dynasty.
358 stranger. Antipater the Idumean, father of Herod the Great who ruled at the time of Christ’s birth, was
procurator of Judaea from 47 BCE.

324
 
360 Barr’d of his right; yet at his Birth a Starr

365

370

375

380

385

390

395

Unseen before in Heav’n proclaims him com,
And guides the Eastern Sages,° who enquire
His place, to offer Incense, Myrrh, and Gold;
His place of birth a solemn° Angel tells
To simple Shepherds, keeping watch by night;
They gladly thither haste, and by a Quire
Of squadrond Angels hear his Carol sung.
A Virgin is his Mother, but his Sire
The Power of the most High; he shall ascend
The Throne hereditarie, and bound his Reign
With earths wide bounds, his glory with the Heav’ns.
He ceas’d, discerning Adam with such joy
Surcharg’d,° as had like grief bin dew’d in tears,
Without the vent of words, which these he breathd.
O Prophet of glad tidings, finisher
Of utmost hope! now clear I understand
What oft my steddiest thoughts have searcht in vain,
Why our great expectation should be call’d
The seed of Woman: Virgin Mother, Haile,
High in the love of Heav’n, yet from my Loynes
Thou shalt proceed, and from thy Womb the Son
Of God most High; So God with man unites.
Needs must the Serpent now his capital° bruise
Expect with mortal paine: say where and when
Thir fight, what stroke shall bruise the Victors heel.
To whom thus Michael. Dream not of thir fight,
As of a Duel, or the local wounds
Of head or heel: not therefore joynes the Son
Manhood to God-head, with more strength to foil
Thy enemie; nor so is overcome
Satan, whose fall from Heav’n, a deadlier bruise,
Disabl’d not to give thee thy deaths wound:
Which hee, who comes thy Saviour, shall recure,°
Not by destroying Satan, but his works
In thee and in thy Seed: nor can this be,
But by fulfilling that which thou didst want,°

the Magi
awe-inspiring

overwhelmed

on the head, fatal

heal

lack

360–9. The story of the birth of Jesus is recounted in Matt. 1–2 and Luke 1–2.
370–1. An echo of Virgil’s prophecy of Augustus (Aeneid 1.287), “imperium Oceano, famam qui terminet
astris” (“he will bound his empire with the ocean, his glory with the stars”).
379. Cf. 5.385–7 and Luke 1:28.

Book 12

400

405

410

415

420

425

Obedience to the Law of God, impos’d
On penaltie of death, and suffering death,
The penaltie to thy transgression due,
And due to theirs which out of thine will grow:
So onely can high Justice rest appaid.°
The Law of God exact° he shall fulfill
Both by obedience and by love, though love
Alone fulfill the Law; thy punishment
He shall endure by coming in the Flesh
To a reproachful life and cursed death,
Proclaiming Life to all who shall believe
In his redemption, and that his obedience
Imputed becomes theirs by Faith, his merits
To save them, not thir own, though legal works.
For this he shall live hated, be blasphem’d,
Seis’d on by force, judg’d, and to death condemnd
A shameful and accurst, naild to the Cross
By his own Nation, slaine for bringing Life;
But to the Cross he nailes thy Enemies,
The Law that is against thee, and the sins
Of all mankinde, with him there crucifi’d,
Never to hurt them more who rightly trust
In this his satisfaction;° so he dies,
But soon revives, Death over him no power
Shall long usurp; ere the third dawning light
Returne, the Starres of Morn shall see him rise
Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light,
Thy ransom paid, which Man from death redeems,
His death for Man, as many as offerd Life
Neglect° not, and the benefit imbrace
By Faith not void of workes: this God-like act
Annuls thy doom, the death thou shouldst have dy’d,

325

satisfied
strict, perfect

payment of penalty

disregard

400 theirs. Your descendants’ transgressions which grow out of “thine.”
401–10. Michael restates the theological doctrine that Christ as “Saviour” will stand in place of humankind,
redressing their disobedience by his perfect “obedience” and suffering the “death” that was their punishment. Humans can only be saved by Christ’s “merits” attributed to them vicariously (“Imputed”), not by
their own good works even if “legal,” conforming to God’s law.
403–4 love. Cf. Rom. 13:10, “Love is the fulfilling of the law.”
406. Cf. Gal. 3:13, “Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree.”
426–7 Faith not void of workes. Humans can obtain the “benefit” of Christ’s merits only by “Faith,” but
not without the “workes” that flow from faith. Cf. 11.64 and note, and also Jas. 2:26, “faith without works
is dead.”

326

430

435

440

445

450

455

460

465
 
In sin for ever lost from life; this act
Shall bruise the head of Satan, crush his strength
Defeating Sin and Death, his two maine armes,
And fix farr deeper in his head thir stings°
Then temporal° death shall bruise the Victors heel,
Or theirs whom he redeems, a death like sleep,
A gentle wafting to immortal Life.
Nor after resurrection shall he stay
Longer on Earth then certaine times to appeer
To his Disciples, Men who in his Life
Still follow’d him; to them shall leave in charge
To teach all nations what of him they learn’d
And his Salvation, them who shall beleeve
Baptizing in the profluent° streame, the signe
Of washing them from guilt of sin to Life
Pure, and in mind prepar’d, if so befall,
For death, like that which the redeemer dy’d.
All Nations they shall teach; for from that day
Not onely to the Sons of Abrahams Loines
Salvation shall be Preacht, but to the Sons
Of Abrahams Faith wherever through the world;
So in his seed all Nations shall be blest.
Then to the Heav’n of Heav’ns he shall ascend
With victory, triumphing through the aire
Over his foes and thine; there shall surprise
The Serpent, Prince of aire, and drag in Chaines
Through all his Realme, and there confounded leave;
Then enter into glory, and resume
His Seat at Gods right hand, exalted high
Above all names in Heav’n; and thence shall come,
When this worlds dissolution shall be ripe,
With glory and power to judge both quick° and dead,
To judge th’ unfaithful dead, but to reward
His faithful, and receave them into bliss,
Whether in Heav’n or Earth, for then the Earth
Shall all be Paradise, far happier place
Then this of Eden, and far happier daies.
So spake th’ Archangel Michael, then paus’d,

deadly effects
temporary, bodily

flowing

living

447–50. Michael here makes explicit the meaning of the promise offered typologically to Abraham’s seed.
454 Prince of aire. One of Satan’s titles; cf. Eph. 2:2, “prince of the power of the air.”

Book 12

470

475

480

485

490

495

As at the Worlds great period;° and our Sire
Replete with joy and wonder thus repli’d.
O goodness infinite, goodness immense!°
That all this good of evil shall produce,
And evil turn to good; more wonderful
Then that which by creation first brought forth
Light out of darkness! full of doubt I stand,
Whether I should repent me now of sin
By mee done and occasiond, or rejoyce
Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring,
To God more glory, more good will to Men
From God, and over wrauth grace shall abound.
But say, if our deliverer up to Heav’n
Must reascend, what will betide the few
His faithful, left among th’ unfaithful herd,
The enemies of truth; who then shall guide
His people, who defend? will they not deale
Wors with his followers then with him they dealt?
Be sure they will, said th’ Angel; but from Heav’n
Hee to his own a Comforter will send,
The promise of the Father, who shall dwell°
His Spirit within them, and the Law of Faith
Working through love, upon thir hearts shall write,
To guide them in all truth, and also arme
With spiritual Armour, able to resist
Satans assaults, and quench his fierie darts,
What° Man can do against them, not affraid,
Though to the death, against such cruelties
With inward consolations recompenc’t,
And oft supported so as shall amaze
Thir proudest persecuters: for the Spirit
Powrd first on his Apostles, whom he sends
To evangelize° the Nations, then on all

327
endpoint, consummation
boundless

make to dwell

as much as

convert

469–78. These lines do not affirm a simple concept of felix culpa – that the Fall was fortunate in bringing
humans greater happiness than they would otherwise have enjoyed – but rather, that the Fall provided
God an occasion to bring still greater good out of evil. Cf. 5.496 –503 for the prelapsarian plan for Adam
and Eve’s growth in perfection.
486 Comforter. The Holy Spirit, who for Milton is much subordinate to both Father and Son.
489 upon thir hearts. Cf. Heb. 8:10, “I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts.”
491–2 spiritual Armour. Cf. Eph. 6:11–16: “Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil . . . Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked.”

328
 
500 Baptiz’d, shall them with wondrous gifts endue°

505

510

515

520

525

To speak all Tongues, and do all Miracles,
As did thir Lord before them. Thus they win
Great numbers of each Nation to receave
With joy the tidings brought from Heav’n: at length
Thir Ministry perform’d, and race well run,
Thir doctrine and thir story written left,
They die; but in thir room, as they forewarne,
Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous Wolves,
Who all the sacred mysteries of Heav’n
To thir own vile advantages shall turne
Of lucre and ambition, and the truth
With superstitions and traditions taint,
Left onely in those written Records pure,
Though not but by the Spirit understood.
Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names,°
Places° and titles, and with these to joine
Secular power, though feigning still to act
By spiritual, to themselves appropriating
The Spirit of God, promisd alike and giv’n
To all Beleevers; and from that pretense,°
Spiritual Lawes by carnal° power shall force
On every conscience; Laws which none shall finde
Left them inrould,° or what the Spirit within
Shall on the heart engrave. What will they then
But force the Spirit of Grace it self, and binde
His consort Libertie; what, but unbuild
His living Temples, built by Faith to stand,
Thir own Faith not anothers: for on Earth

endow

honors
offices

assertion of right
fleshly, worldly
written (in the Bible)

501 speak all Tongues. Cf. Acts. 2:4–7, where the apostles speak in many tongues.
506 story written. In the Gospels and Epistles.
507–11 Wolves. Cf. Acts 20:29: “after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing
the flock.” See “Lycidas,” 113–29.
513–14. The Bible (“those written Records pure”) can only be rightly understood by the illumination of the
Spirit in each Christian.
515–37. The history summarized is of the corruption of the Church and persecutions of conscience in patristic times and after, under the popes and Christian rulers, but the passage also alludes to what Milton saw
as the revival of “popish” superstitions in the English Church after the Restoration and the fierce persecution of dissenters.
526 his consort Libertie. Cf. 2 Cor. 3:17: “Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.” Milton insisted
in his prose tracts that Christ’s gospel and the Spirit of God promote liberty, civil and religious.
527 living Temples. Individual Christians, cf. 1 Cor. 3:16: “Know ye not that ye are the temple of God.”

Book 12

530

535

540

545

550

555

560

Who against Faith and Conscience can be heard
Infallible? yet many will presume:
Whence heavie persecution shall arise
On all who in the worship persevere
Of Spirit and Truth; the rest, farr greater part,
Will deem in outward Rites and specious formes
Religion satisfi’d; Truth shall retire
Bestuck with slandrous darts, and works of Faith
Rarely be found: so shall the World goe on,
To good malignant, to bad men benigne,
Under her own waight groaning till the day
Appeer of respiration° to the just,
And vengeance to the wicked, at return
Of him so lately promiss’d to thy aid
The Womans seed, obscurely then foretold,
Now amplier known thy Saviour and thy Lord,
Last in the Clouds from Heav’n to be reveald
In glory of the Father, to dissolve
Satan with his perverted World, then raise
From the conflagrant mass,° purg’d and refin’d,
New Heav’ns, new Earth, Ages of endless date
Founded in righteousness and peace and love
To bring forth fruits Joy and eternal Bliss.
He ended; and thus Adam last reply’d.
How soon hath thy prediction, Seer blest,
Measur’d this transient World, the Race of time,
Till time stand fixt: beyond is all abyss,
Eternitie, whose end no eye can reach.
Greatly instructed I shall hence depart,
Greatly in peace of thought, and have my fill
Of knowledge, what° this Vessel can containe;
Beyond which was my folly to aspire.
Henceforth I learne, that to obey is best,
And love with feare the onely God, to walk
As in his presence, ever to observe
His providence, and on him sole depend,

329

respite

burning world

as much as

529–30 Infallible. An attack on papal claims of infallibility, asserted though not proclaimed as doctrine until
1870; the attack extends to all religious or civil leaders who attempt to impose an orthodoxy.
543–51. With the account of the Second Coming of Christ, the Last Judgment, and the renewal of all things,
the meaning of the “Womans seed” destroying Satan’s works is made fully explicit. Cf. 2 Pet. 3:13, “we,
according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth.”

330
 
565 Mercifull over all his works, with good

570

575

580

585

590

595

600

Still° overcoming evil, and by small
Accomplishing great things, by things deemd weak
Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise
By simply meek; that suffering for Truths sake
Is fortitude to highest victorie,
And to the faithful Death the Gate of Life;
Taught this by his example whom I now
Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blest.
To whom thus also th’ Angel last repli’d:
This having learnt, thou hast attained the summe
Of wisdom; hope no higher, though all the Starrs
Thou knewst by name, and all th’ ethereal Powers,
All secrets of the deep, all Natures works,
Or works of God in Heav’n, Aire, Earth, or Sea,
And all the riches of this World enjoydst,
And all the rule, one Empire; onely add
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable,° add Faith,
Add vertue, Patience, Temperance, add Love,
By name to come call’d Charitie, the soul
Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loath
To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess
A paradise within thee, happier farr.
Let us descend now therefore from this top°
Of Speculation; for the hour precise
Exacts° our parting hence; and see the Guards,
By mee encampt on yonder Hill, expect
Thir motion,° at whose Front a flaming Sword,
In signal of remove,° waves fiercely round;
We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve;
Her also I with gentle Dreams have calm’d
Portending good, and all her spirits compos’d
To meek submission: thou at season fit
Let her with thee partake what thou hast heard,
Chiefly what may concern her Faith to know,
The great deliverance by her Seed to come
(For by the Womans Seed) on all Mankind.

continually, always

corresponding

hill, summit
requires
signal
departure

567–68 weak / Subverting worldly strong. Cf. 1 Cor. 1:27: “God hath chosen the weak things of the world
to confound the things which are mighty.”
587 paradise within thee. Compare Satan’s interior state at 4.20 –2, 75.
589 Speculation. Both extensive view and theological inquiry.

Book 12

605

610

615

620

625

630

635

That ye may live, which will be many dayes,
Both in one Faith unanimous though sad,
With cause° for evils past, yet much more cheer’d
With meditation on the happie end.
He ended, and they both descend the Hill;
Descended, Adam to the Bowre where Eve
Lay sleeping ran before, but found her wak’t;
And thus with words not sad she him receav’d.
Whence thou returnst, and whither wentst, I know;
For God is also in sleep, and Dreams advise,
Which he hath sent propitious, some great good
Presaging, since with sorrow and hearts distress
Wearied I fell asleep: but now lead on;
In mee is no delay; with thee to goe,
Is to stay here; without thee here to stay,
Is to go hence unwilling; thou to mee
Art all things under Heav’n, all places thou,
Who for my wilful crime art banisht hence.
This further consolation yet secure
I carry hence; though all by mee is lost,
Such favour I unworthie am voutsaft,
By mee the Promis’d Seed shall all restore.
So spake our Mother Eve, and Adam heard
Well pleas’d, but answer’d not; for now too nigh
Th’ Archangel stood, and from the other Hill
To thir fixt Station, all in bright array
The Cherubim descended; on the ground
Gliding meteorous,° as Ev’ning Mist
Ris’n from a River o’re the marish ° glides,
And gathers ground fast at the Labourers heel
Homeward returning. High in Front advanc’t,
The brandisht Sword of God before them blaz’d
Fierce as a Comet; which with torrid heat,
And vapour° as the Libyan Air adust,°

331

good reason

like a meteor
marsh

smoke / scorched

611–13 Dreams advise. The lines suggest that Eve’s dream was also a vehicle of prophecy to her. Cf. Num.
12:6: “If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will
speak unto him in a dream.”
615–18 with thee to goe. Eve’s last love lyric in the poem invites comparison with her prelapsarian lyric
(4.641–56); it also echoes Ruth’s promise to accompany her mother-in-law Naomi: “whither thou goest,
I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge” (Ruth 1:16).
621–3. In these lines Eve describes herself as the central epic protagonist of the poem, through whom “all”
is lost and “all” is restored.

332
 
Began to parch that temperate Clime; whereat
In either hand the hastning Angel caught
Our lingring Parents, and to th’ Eastern Gate
Led them direct, and down the Cliff as fast
640 To the subjected° Plaine; then disappeer’d.
They looking back, all th’ Eastern side beheld
Of Paradise, so late thir happie seat,
Wav’d over by that flaming Brand,° the Gate
With dreadful° Faces throng’d and fierie Armes:
645 Som natural tears they drop’d, but wip’d them soon;
The World was all before them, where to choose
Thir place of rest, and Providence thir guide:
They hand in hand with wandring steps and slow,
Through Eden took thir solitarie way.
THE END

low-lying

sword
fearsome
